Heyla! We have a story about the Spear-Danes, from the old days
when they were big and their kings showed their strength. There
was one king, Shield Schefing, who stole many mead-benches from
other tribes and terrified their leaders. At first, he was found weak
and wandering, but was taken in and then grew under the comfort of
the skies. He consumed honors until each of the other surrounding
tribes over the whale’s road were forced to obey him and pay tribute.
They say, that was a good king. After all this (when he was old), Shield had a son—a young one in
the courtyard—who had been sent by God as a comfort to the people
because He had seen how they were distressed, left without a strong
leader for a long while.
The Lord of life,
ruler of glory, gifted worldly honour:
Beowulf was famed with widespread renown,
son of Scyld, in the northern lands.
So should a young man do good things
with costly gifts in his father’s care,
so that in old age loyal companions
remain with him afterwards; when war comes
they will support their prince. Through glorious deeds
a man shall prosper among peoples everywhere. Scyld then set off at his due time,
the mighty lord went into the Lord’s keeping.
His beloved companions carried him then to the
water’s edge, as he himself had instructed
when he still governed, that much-loved Scylding friend,
their beloved land-prince held power a long time.
There in the port a ring-prowed ship stood anchored,
icy and eager, a nobleman’s vessel.
They laid down their dear king,
giver of rings, in the bosom of the ship,
mighty by the mainmast. There were many treasures
from faraway lands, such precious things loaded there.
I have never heard of a finer ship
fitted with the weapons and armor of war,
swords and harnesses. In its embrace lay
a multitude of treasures, which were to go with him
far off, into the dominion of the sea.
No fewer gifts were provided for him there,
the very wealth of a nation, than what was once done by those who,
at his birth, set him adrift,
alone over the waves as a child.
Then they set for him a golden banner
high over his head, let the water carry him,
gave him to the powers of the sea. In them there was a sad spirit,
a mournful mind. Men did not know,
to tell the truth, hall counselors,
heroes under the heavens, who accepted that load.
Then was in the stronghold Beow of the Scyldings
a beloved king of the people for a long time,
famous among the folk. His father had gone elsewhere,
that honored one had left the earth. Until to Beow once more was born
high Healfdene, who held while he lived,
old and battle-fierce, the glorious Scyldings.
From him four children all told
arose into the world, from the leader of the host,
Heorogar, and Hrothgar, and Halga the Good.
That woman, I heard, was the noble one’s queen,
the beloved bedfellow of the Battle-Scylfing.
Then Hrothgar was granted success in war,
glory in battle, so that his dear kinsmen
served him eagerly, until the young warriors
grew to be a mighty troop. He had the idea
that he should bid men to build
a house, a great mead-hall, which
the children of men would hear of forever.
And there within he would share everything,
with young and old, such as God gave him,
except for the common land and lives of men.
Far and wide then I heard the work was declared
to many peoples throughout this middle earth,
To adorn the place of the nation. It happened to him in time,
Quickly among men, that it was all ready,
The largest of hall-buildings. He gave it the name “Heort,”
He who had power of his word far and wide.
He did not neglect his vow, distributed rings,
Treasure at the feast. The hall towered,
High and wide-gabled. It awaited the flames of battle,
The hated fire. It was not to be much longer,
Until the sword-hatred, swearing with oaths,
After murderous malice, would awaken.
Then the powerful spirit miserably
Endured the time, he who lived in the shadows,
When he each day heard merriment
Loud in the hall. There was the music of the harp,
The clear song of the scop. He spoke, who knew how
To narrate from afar the origin of men,
Said that the Almighty created the earth,
The bright beauteous land, as the water surrounds it,
Established victorious the sun and moon,
The luminaries as light for land-dwellers,
And adorned the fields of the earth
With branches and leaves, He also created life
For each of the kindreds that move about alive.
So those courtiers lived happily,
Blessedly, until one began
To carry out crimes, an enemy in hell.
That grim spirit was called Grendel,
The infamous border-walker, who ruled the moors,
The fens and strongholds. The land of the race of monsters
That miserable man lived in for a time,
after the Creator had condemned him
with Cain’s kin. That killing He punished,
the everlasting Lord, the slaying of Abel.
There was no relish in that feud, for He banished him far away,
the Maker for that sin, away from mankind.
From him awoke each kind of onerous offspring:
enemies and elves and evil spirits
and likewise giants, who wrestled with God
time and time again; He repaid them a reward for that.
He advanced then as soon as night came, sought the
high house, and how the Ring Danes
had occupied it after their beer-banquet.
He found within there a band of princes
sleeping after the feast. Sorrow they did not know—
the misfortune of men. The wretched wight,
grim and greedy, was ready at once,
fierce and furious, and from their rest he seized
thirty thegns. From there he left,
boasting of booty, to return home,
sated by slaughter, to find his abode.
It was at dawn, with daybreak,
that Grendel’s war-cunning became known to men.
Then after feasting woe arose,
a great cry in the morning. The renowned leader,
the good prince of old, sat mournfully;
the mighty one suffered, bore sorrow for his thegns,
once they witnessed the track of that loathed one,
of that cursed spirit. That strife was too strong,
loathed and lengthy. It was not much later,
only after a night, he acted again,
perpetrated greater murder-slaughter, and mourned not for it,
acts of feuding and crime; he was too fixated on them.
Then the man was easy to find who would elsewhere,
further away, seek his resting place,
a bed among the outer buildings, when it was shown to him,
truly told with a clear sign:
the hatred of the hall-thane; he kept further away
and more securely afterwards, whoever had escaped the fiend.
So he ruled and strove against justice,
one against all, until it stood abandoned,
that best of halls. The time was long:
For the space of twelve winters he endured anguish,
the friend of the Scyldings, every kind of woe,
endless sorrows. Therefore, it became visible
to the children of mankind, known and revealed
sadly in stories, that Grendel struggled
for a long time with Hrothgar, and carried forth his hate-violence,
his sins, and his enmity, for many half-years,
a perpetual strife. He wanted no friendship
with any men of the Danish host,
and wished neither to cease his deadly evil, nor settle for a fee;
nor did the wise advisers there have reason to expect
brilliant compensation from the hands of the slayer.
The hideous opponent, the dark death-shadow,
pursued both the aged and the young;
he lay in wait and ambushed them, and in perpetual night held
the misty moors. Men do not know
which way hell-demons glide in their goings.
Thus, the enemy of mankind, hideous and solitary,
often carried out his many crimes,
harsh injuries. He dwelled in Heorot,
the richly ornamented hall in dark nights.
Not at all could he touch the gift-seat,
the precious thing because of God, nor did he know his purpose.
That was great misery for the lord of the Scyldings,
the mind’s griefs. Often many a mighty man
sat in consultation; they heeded the advice,
what for strong-minded ones would be best
to do against the perilous horror.
Sometimes they vowed at heathen temples
reverence to idols, urged with words
that the soul-killer would grant them aid
against the people’s threat. Such was their custom,
hope of the heathens. They remembered hell
in their minds, they did not know the Creator
the Judge of deeds, nor did they know the Lord God.
Nor indeed did they understand how to praise Heaven’s Protector,
the Ruler of Glory. Woe shall befall the one who must,
because of evil affliction, thrust their soul
into the fire’s embraces, unable to hope for comfort
or any change. Well shall it be for the one who is able,
after their death-day, to go to the Lord
and seek the protection of the Father’s embraces.
Thus, on the sorrow of the age, the son of Healfdene
brooded ceaselessly. The wise warrior was unable
to set misery aside. The oppression was too severe;
grievous and relentless, it had befallen the people;
cruel, violent torment, the greatest of night terrors.
News was heard in the homeland of Hygelac’s warrior,
a man respected among the Geats, of Grendel’s actions.
He was mankind’s strongest of might
in those days of this life,
noble and great. He asked to equip
a good ship. He said he would seek
the war king over the swan road,
famous king, since he was in need of men.
Not at all did the wise noblemen blame him
for the adventure, though he was dear to them,
they urged the valiant one. They studied omens.
The good man had from the Geats
chosen warriors, those the bravest
he might find. One of the fifteen
went to the ship, the man led the way,
the sea-skilled man, to the shore.
A span of time passed. The ship was on the waves,
the boat beneath the bluff. Noble ones, equipped,
ascended the ship. Currents whirled,
water against the sand. Warriors carried
into the ship’s hold shimmering treasures,
emblazoned battle-gear. The men shoved off,
men on their willed-for journey, in a well-bound boat.
Then they left, over the whale-home, propelled by the wind—
the frothy-necked boat looked most like a bird—
even after the expected time of the following day had elapsed,
the stem-twisted ship had travelled,
so that those sailors saw land:
the gleaming sea-cliff, high promontory,
expansive sea-ness. Then the sea voyage was over,
the ocean ended whence, quickly,
the people of the Weder-Geats stepped onto the strand;
the sea-wood was moored, the mail-shirts resounding,
the battle-garb. They gave thanks to God
that the wave-ways were easy for them.
Then the ward of the Scyldings saw them from the wall,
he who must keep the ocean-cliffs,
must bear bright spears over the deck,
ready in his war-gear. Curiosity plagued him
in his mind-thoughts who these men were.
Then he departed riding his horse to the shore,
the thane of Hrothgar, brandishing mightily
the strong wood in his hands, asking in formal terms,
“Who are you all, armor-having warriors
guarded in your corslets, who have thus come
leading your steep ship over the watery lanes,
to here across the seas?” He amid his select troop was
at the farthest point, held watch by the sea, so that no enemy with
a sea-invading army might do harm in the land of the Danes. “Shieldbearers have not more openly dared to come, nor did you know that
leave would be readily granted from those accomplished in battle,
permission from kinsmen. I never saw a greater man in the world
than is one of you, a fighter in war-gear; he is not merely a hallretainer decked out with weapons unless his looks betray him, his
unique appearance. Now I shall know your lineage, rather than you
go farther from here as spies into the land of the Danes. Now you
travelers from afar, you sea-journeyers, hear
this simple thought: that it is advisable to say quickly from where
you came.”
That noblest of men, the leader of the company, answered him,
unlocking his word-hoard: “We are from the nation of the Geatish
people, and Hygelac’s hearth-companions. My father, a great war­
rior, was well known among the people. He was called Ecgtheow.
He saw many winters before he departed on his journey from this
world. He was well-regarded by the wise throughout the whole wide
world. We come in good faith to your lord, the son of Healfdene, the
protector of your people. Let your counsel be true! We have a great
message to declare to him,
to the lord of the Danes. Nor shall there be
anything secret, I expect: you know, if it is
truly as we have heard tell,
that an enemy of some sort among the Scyldings,
a secret persecutor in the dark nights,
manifests terror and awful affliction,
humiliation and slaughter. I can give Hrothgar
this counsel from my generous mind,
how he, wise and good, may overcome the enemy—
if a reversal of fortune should ever come to him,
a remedy of these afflictions come again,
and the seethings of his sorrow become cooler,
or always afterward endure a time of tribulation,
a great distress while the best of houses
remains in its high place.”
The guard spoke from where he sat on horseback,
the fearless officer. “A keen shield-warrior,
he who considers well, must know
the distinction between both words and deeds.
I hear that this host is friendly
to the king of the Scyldings. Go forth bearing
your weapons and gear; I will guide you.
Likewise I will command my young followers
to guard your ship with honor against all enemies,
this newly-tarred vessel on the sand,
until the twist-prowed wood carries
back over the ocean currents to the Weder borders
every beloved man among these doing good,
who is fated to survive the battle-rush whole.”
They went to leave then. The ship stayed in place,
rested in the tideland, the wide-bosomed vessel
secured at anchor. Boar effigies,
gold-touched, gleamed above cheekguards—
a decorated, fire-hard thing to keep watch over life.
War-hearted ones clattered, fell in together,
the men hurried on till they caught sight of it
fully timbered, fitted out richly, trimmed with gold:
that hall, the most famous to land-dwellers
under the heavens, in which the mighty one abode.
Its brightness shone on many lands.
The fierce fighter pointed them to the splendid
home of the proud so they could march
right to it. One among warriors,
he turned his horse, spoke a word behind him:
“It is time for me to depart. May the all-ruling Father keep you safe
on your journeys through his kindness. I will go to the sea to keep
watch against a hostile troop.”
The street was stone-paved; the path guided the warriors together.
The hard, hand-linked battle-byrnie shone, the bright iron-ring of
the armor resounded, when they first set out for the hall in their
awe-inspiring armor. The sea-weary men set down their wide
shields, those exceptionally hard rounds, against the wall of the
build­ing; they bent down onto the bench—the byrnies, the warriors’
war-gear, rang; the spears stood, the gear of the sea-men gathered
