for night’s repose. He knew that monster
planned an attack against that high hall.
After they could see the sun’s light,
until darkening night, shapes from the cover of shadow,
came crawling over everything, dusky under the clouds.
The troop all arose.
Then, one warrior greeted the other warrior,
Hroðgar to Beowulf, hailed him with fortune,
granted command of the wine-house and spoke these words:
“Never, since I could raise hand and shield,
have I before entrusted the glorious hall of the Danes,
to any man except to you now.
Keep now and protect the best of houses,
remember fame, demonstrate mighty courage, watch against wrath.
There will be no dearth of desire for you
if you survive that courageous work… alive.”
Then Hrothgar departed with his troop of warriors, the protector
of the Scyldings, out from the hall; the war-chief wished to seek
Wealhtheow, the queen in bed. The King of Glory, so men learned,
had appointed a hall-guard against Grendel; he held a special service
to the lord of the Danes, kept watch against a giant. Indeed the man
of the Geats firmly trusted his brave strength and the favor of the
Lord. Then he removed his mail shirt and the helmet from his head,
gave his decorated sword, the best of weapons, to an attendant and
ordered him to guard his war-gear. Then the good man spoke a boast:
“I do not claim for myself lesser war-skills,
deeds of battle, than Grendel himself.
Therefore I do not wish to kill him with a sword,
to deprive him of life, though I am very well able to.
He does not know finer skills, so as to be able to strike me,
to cut my shield to pieces, though he be renowned
for hostile deeds. But we two shall, in the night,
refrain from swordplay, if he dares seek out
battle without weapon. And thereafter, wise God,
the holy Lord, shall grant glory
to whoever’s hand as seems proper to Him.”
He then bent down, the battle-brave one; the cushion met
the warrior’s face, and around him many
brave sailors lay down on the hall-bed.
Not one of them thought that he would ever return
from there to his homeland, to the people or village
where he was raised. But they had heard
that far too many of the Danes in the wine hall
had been seized before in death-slaughter.
But the Lord granted to them a war-victory weaving,
comfort and help to the Wederas men
that they entirely overcome their enemy
through the strength of one by his selfsame might.
Truly it is known that mighty God
has forever ruled mankind. In blackest night he came,
the shadow-walker moved. The archers slept—
those that must hold the horned-house—
all but one. That was known to men,
that if God did not wish it, the battle-demon could not heave them
down into the shadows, but the fierce, wakeful foe, his heart spurred,
awaited the result of battle.
Then Grendel came, scrambling from the moors under misty cliffs:
he bore God’s fury. The evil killer meant to capture some human in
the hall, the high one. He advanced under cloud-cover until he was
sure he knew the gilded wine-hall, golden gathering-place of men.
Not that it was the first time that he had sought out Hrothgar’s home.
Never in the days of his life, before or after, did he find a harder fate
among heroes. Then the striding warrior came to the hall, despoiled
of joys. The door sprang quickly open,
made fast with fire-forged bands, as he touched it with his hands.
Then with baleful intent, angered as he was, he ripped open
the mouth of the hall. Immediately then
the enemy trod forth on that patterned floor,
angry of mood he advanced. From his eyes there shone
a horrible light like that of fire.
He beheld in the hall many a warrior
sleeping there together, a band of kinsmen,
a company of young warriors. In his heart he then laughed,
evil monster, for he meant to separate body and soul
of many a warrior present there
before the day dawned. There welled up in him there
the expectation of his fill in feasting. But it was not to be
that he should feast anymore upon mankind
after that night. The powerful one observed,
Hygelac’s brave kinsman,
marked how the ravager
would carry out his ambush.
The powerful one didn’t think to pause
but at his first chance swiftly snatched up
a sleeping man, greedily tore at him,
crushed his bones, slurped blood from his veins,
gulped down bite after bite. Soon he had
devoured the dead man’s feet, hands—
everything. The fiend advanced,
groped and grasped again
for the bold-hearted warrior in the bed.
Beowulf, grasping his hostile intent,
braced himself with his own arm.
Immediately the guardian of evil realized
that he had never encountered
in the corners of the earth, in another man
a greater hand-grip. He became in his mind
afraid at heart. None the sooner was he able to get away.
His mind was eager for him to depart, he wished to flee into a hiding place,
to seek the company of devils. It was not his experience there
such as he met before in his life-days.
He remembered then, the good kinsman of Hygelac,
the evening-speech. He stood up
and seized him firmly. Fingers burst.
The giant was trying to escape; the warrior stepped further.
The famous one intended, where he might do so,
to go to a more remote place, and away from there
to escape into the fen-retreats. He knew the control of his fingers
was in the grips of the hostile one, that it was a sad journey
that the harmful destroyer took to Heorot.
The splendid hall rang. For all the Danes arose,
for the fortress-dwellers, for each of the bold ones,
for the warriors, great terror. Both were enraged,
the fierce hall-guardians. The building resounded.
It was a great wonder that the wine-hall
withstood the battle-brave ones, that it did not fall to the ground,
the beautiful building. But for this it was firm,
inside and outside with iron bands,
fastened with ingenuity. There from the floor
many a mead-bench bent away, as I have heard tell,
adorned with gold, where the hostile ones fought.
They had not expected this before, the councillors of the Scyldings,
that ever in any way any man
might break apart the excellent and bone-decorated hall,
destroy it with cunning, unless the embrace of fire
might swallow it in flames. The sound rose up,
new and strange: shock and awe
arose in the North-Danes, in every one
who heard the wailing woe through the wall,
God’s enemy howling his agony,
a song without triumph, Hell’s captive
wailing his pain. He held him fast,
he who was the strongest man of might
in that day of this life.
The protector of earls did not wish at all
to let that deadly visitor leave alive,
and did not consider his life-days useful
to any people. Around him, many
an earl of Beowulf drew his ancient heirloom,
wished to protect the life
of the great prince, as they were able to do so.
They did not know it, when they endured battle,
brave-minded warriors,
and intended to strike on every side,
to seek Grendel’s soul: that no war-swords,
best of swords, any over the earth,
would touch the malefactor.
But Grendel had cursed weapons of victory,
every blade. His death,
on that day of this life,
had to be miserable, and the alien spirit
had to travel far into the dominion of his enemies.
Then he who earlier carried out many
afflictions of mind upon mankind,
many crimes—he was guilty before God—then he found out
that his body would not avail him;
but that courageous kinsman of Hygelac
had him by the hand. Each was to the other
loathsome while living. The terrible adversary
weathered a body-wound. On his shoulder showed
a woeful wound plain to see, sinews sprang apart,
bone-links burst. To Beowulf was
granted battle-glory. Grendel had to
flee thence, life-sick, under the fen-slopes
to seek his doleful dwelling. He knew it more firmly
that his life’s end was come,
the day-count of days. To all the Danes,
after that bloody battle, blitheness had come about.
He had then cleansed, he who before came from afar,
wise and brave, the halls of Hrothgar,
saved them from strife. He rejoiced in his night-work,
his feats of courage. The man of the Geats had
fulfilled his boast to the East-Danes.
Likewise, he remedied all distress,
the sorrow that they had suffered before,
and the misery they had been bound to endure
no small grief. That was made evident
when the battle-fierce man placed the hand,
arm, and shoulder—all of Grendel’s grip
was there together—under the vaulted roof.
Then, in the morning, as I have heard it said,
there were many warriors around the gift-hall.
Chieftains traveled from far and near,
over the wide way, to behold the marvel,
the tracks of the enemy.
His death
seemed no sad thing to any man
of those who beheld the wretch’s footsteps,
how he, wearied and on his way,
overcome with enmity, bore his mortal trudge
into the mere of the monsters, doomed and shunned.
There the tide swelled with blood,
a horrid surge of waves all mixed up
with hot innards: it welled up with carnage;
doomed, he hid himself when joyless
he laid down his life and his heathen soul
in his refuge in the fens, where hell received him.
So then the old companions turned again
along with many young men from the cheerful journey,
brave ones from the mere riding horses,
warriors on steeds. There, Beowulf’s
boldness was broadcast. Many of them muttered often
there was no one...
no one northward nor southward,
no one between sea and sea,
no one walking the broad earth,
no one beneath the bending sky,
who was a better shield-wielder,
nor was there any more worthy of a kingdom...
Though indeed by no means did those Danes lay blame
upon their gracious lord, the kindhearted Hrothgar,
for that was still a good king.
Then sometimes they, horsebacked and battle-brave, allowed their straw-colored steeds
to leap forth, to journey on in playful contest with each other
where the footways were fair and familiar.
Sometimes a king’s servant,
a man with a mind for myths and a head heavy with vaunting vows,
recollected legends of long past heroes,
an uncounted quantity; other words he found
And he bound them together with true skill.
The man began then
to animate the quest of Beowulf
and craft a proper tale,
transpose the words. He told all
he had heard about Sigmund,
of courageous deeds, many strange,
the Waelsing’s struggles, journeys wide,
which the sons of men would not have known,
wrath and violence, without Fitela,
when he would speak
uncle to nephew, as they were ever
comrades in conflict.
Many kind of monster they had
slain by sword. For Sigmund
after death came no small fame
since, battlehard, he killed the worm.
The guardian of the horde, he under hoary stone,
the son of nobles, alone attempted
a daring deed, nor was Fitela with him.
Yet he succeeded so that the sword pierced through
that wondrous wyrm, so that it stood in the wall,
that lordly iron. The dragon died of that destruction.
That fierce combatant had gone in strength
so that he could enjoy the ring-hoard
of his own will. His sea-boat he loaded,
bore into the bosom of the ship bright treasures,
the son of the Wæls. The fierce worm melted.
That was the wanderer most known wide
throughout peoples, a protector of warriors,
for bold deeds. So he first prospered.
Long after Heremod’s battles ended,
Fought with strength and courage,
He was betrayed and sent away.
Among his enemies he quickly met his death.
For too long he had wallowed in misery and sorrow.
His people suffered as did his nobles.
In earlier times many wise men bemoaned
The plight of the strong willed miserable Heremod.
They had thought he and they would thrive.
Now they hoped the son
Would take his father’s place and prosper,
Watch over their fortune, protect the people, and maintain the nation,
The realm of heroes, the home of the Scyldings.
Beowulf was held in high esteem, a friend to all.
Wicked miserable Heremod a dim dark memory.
Racing by turns, with horses they measured out
the bright street. By then morning light
too had hurried on. In firm mind
to see a puzzling wonder, many a man strode
to the hall so high. Likewise the king himself,
guardian of ringhoards, stepped forth glorious
from the spousal bower, conspicuous in his excellence,
with a great company; and with him his queen
measured the meadpath with a cohort of girls.
Hrothgar spoke up. He went to the hall,
stood in a high place, looked at the lofty roof
decorated with gold and Grendel’s hand.
“May our thanks speed to the All-Ruler
for this sight. I have experienced many a hateful thing,
many griefs from Grendel. But always God can work
wonder upon wonder, the Protector of Glory.
It was not long ago that I did not expect
to see relief in this life
from any of my miseries while, stained with blood,
the best of houses in slaughter stood,
woe widespread; or each of the wise,
those who could not hope to defend
the people’s stronghold from adversaries,
demons and devils. Now a warrior,
through the might of God, has done the deed
which we could not do with all our cunning.
Behold! It may well be said that
whichever woman brought forth such a son
among the race of men, if she yet lives,
that the Old Measurer was gracious to her
in childbearing. Now, Beowulf,
best of men, as a son to me
I will love you in my heart. Henceforth, hold well
a new kinship. There will not be for you any lack
of worldly wealth over which I have control.
Very often for less I appointed rewards,
an honoring with gifts for a lowlier warrior,
inferior at battle. Thou thyself hast
brought about with actions, that thy deed will live
forever and ever. The Omnipotent One
reward thou with goodness, just as He up to now has done.”
Beowulf spoke, son of Ecþeow:
“With much goodwill we brought about this fight,
