work of valor, we dared audaciously
the strength of an unknown one. I wished more
that thou might have seen him,
the enemy himself killed among decorated arms.
I had intended to quickly bind him in
strong grasps in a bed of death,
so that he would have to lie struggling for life
on account of my hand-grip, unless he abandoned his body.
When the Lord did not wish it, I could not hinder him in going,
and by no means did I hold him, the deadly enemy,
so firmly. The fiend was too powerful
in his stride. Yet he left his hand,
arm, and shoulder to remain behind as a life-protection.
By no means did the wretched man
obtain any consolation there in that manner.
By no means will the evil-doer live longer
afflicted in wrongdoings, but the wound will have him
tightly seized in a malicious grip,
in evil bonds; there the outlawed man
shall await a great judgement,
how glorious God wishes to sentence him.”
Then Ecglaf’s son was a more silent man
in his boasts of battle feats,
once nobles had inspected the hand,
up over the high roof through a warrior’s craft—
the foe’s fingers. The tip of each one,
in place of each fingernail, was just like steel,
a hand-spike of a heathen and a warrior,
grievous and ghastly. Everyone said
that no sword of the stalwart, no iron of old,
would touch him, would wound
the opponent’s bloody battle-hand.
Then quickly came the command that Heorot’s interior
Was to be decorated by hand. There were many to do this
Both men and women, they prepared the guest quarters
Of the wine hall. Ornamented with gold the
Tapestries shone out from the walls. They were a wondrous
Sight for all to gaze upon.
That glorious building was broken.
The inside held fast in iron bands
The hinges of the doors burst apart. The roof alone
Survived completely intact when the wretched monster
Guilty of his wicked deeds turned in flight
Fearing for his life. It is not easy
To escape from death, try it who will;
We are obliged to seek, us with souls,
Earth dwellers and children of men,
To go to that appointed place
where his body, fixed in its grave,
sleeps after feasting. Then time was and season
that Healfdene’s son should go to the hall.
The king himself would taste of the feast.
I’ve heard of no nation greater in force
better-behaved to their generous lord.
Then they bent to the benches, the keepers of fame,
rejoiced at the feast. They fittingly drank
many a mead-cup, kinsmen of theirs,
strong in their minds, in that high hall,
Hrothgar and Hrothulf. Heorot inside was
filled with friends. The People-Scyldings
not at all at that time showed signs of deceit.
Then Beowulf was given Healfdene’s sword;
a golden standard as victory’s reward,
the adorned standard, helm, and byrnie.
Many saw the famous treasure-sword
brought before the hero. Beowulf took
the full flagon from the floor. Of the reward-gift he did not
as payment need to be ashamed.
I have not heard that more graciously four treasures
adorned with gold, many men
on ale-bench have given to others.
Around the helmet’s roof, the head-guard
was wound with wires, the reinforced crest guarded from without
so that what the files have left could not savagely,
wondrously-tempered, harm him, when the shield-fighter
had to go against enemies.
The defender of earls then ordered eight horses,
with decorated head-gear, led into the hall floor,
in under the eaves. Upon one sat
a saddle decorated with works of art, adorned with treasure.
That was the warseat of the high king
when the son of Healfdene desired to perform
swordplay. At the front the widely-known warrior
never lay prone, when the corpses fell.
And then the lord of the friends of Ing
granted to Beowulf ownership of both,
horses and weapons. He bade him to use them well.
So manfully did the glorious lord,
hoard-protector of warriors, repay the storm of battle
with horses and treasures, that never could they be reproached by anybody
who desires to speak the truth according to what is right.
Then the lord of earls to each
of those who with Beowulf took a sea journey
on the mead-benches gave treasures,
old heirlooms, and that one ordered
to compensate in gold the man whom Grendel earlier
sinfully slaughtered. As he more of them would,
except for them mighty God forestalled fate,
and on account of that man’s courage. The Measurer ruled all
of the kin of men, as he now yet does.
Therefore is his intellect everywhere the highest
forethought of the mind. Much must one endure
of the lovely and the loathly he who for long here
in these conflict-days enjoys the world.
There was song and sound together at once
before the battle leader of the Halfdanes
the glee-wood was touched, a lay often recited.
Then the hall-entertainment, Hrothgar’s scop
along the mead benches was obliged to tell
of the sons of Finn, when the calamity befell them,
the hero of the Halfdanes, Hnæf of the Scyldings,
was fated to fall in the Frisian slaughter.
Nor indeed had Hildeburh cause to praise
the good faith of the Jutes. Guiltless, she was
deprived of her loved ones at the battle-play,
her son and brother. They fell to fate,
wounded by the spear. That was a mournful woman.
Not at all without cause, the daughter of Hoc
mourned the decree of fate, after morning came.
When she, under the sky, was able to see the
slaughter of kinsmen. Where he previously held the greatest
joy in the world, war took away all
of Finn’s thegns, except only a few
so that he could not in any way
fight any war against Hengest on the battlefield,
nor could the survivors of woe drive out through conflict
the lord’s thegn. But to them they offered terms,
that they would grant another home to them,
hall and high seat, that they would share control of half
with the sons of the Jutes.
And at the gifting of treasure the son of Folcwalda
would honor the Danes each day,
present Hengest’s host with rings,
even as much ornamented gold
as he would have favored the Frisian people with
in the beerhall.
Then they confirmed on both sides
a fast peace-treaty. Finn to Hengest
made oaths with unquestioned zeal
that with the judgement of his advisors he would
maintain the honour of these survivors,
that no man would break the oaths in word or deed,
nor would ever mention through desire to harm
that they were following the killer of their ring-giver,
without their lord, as need impelled them.
And if any Frisian said anything dire
to remind them of their murderous hate,
then the sword’s edge would settle it.
The oath was prepared, and ancient gold
taken from the hoard. The War-Scyldings’
best warrior was ready for the flame.
It was easy to see on that pyre
the stained coat of mail, the swine all gilded
the iron-hard boar, and many princes
stricken with wounds (some fell in the carnage).
Then Hildeburh commanded at Hnaef’s pyre
her own son to be committed to the inferno,
the bone-cask to be carried and given up to the fire,
beside his uncle. The lady mourned,
she sang her lamentations. The warrior was taken up,
he flew to the clouds. The greatest of funeral pyres
roared beside the grave-mound. Heads melted,
gaping wounds ruptured, whilst blood gushed out
from that damned body-bite. Fire swallowed up entirely—
that greediest of spirits— those whom battle had taken
from both tribes. Their glory was gone.
The warriors left then to seek out their homes,
friendless, turning their gaze to Frisia,
to their homes and their capital.
Hengest as yet
remained the blood-stained winter with Finn
entirely undivided. He thought of his home,
although he might on the sea drive
the ring-prowed ship. The sea heaved in the storm,
fought against the wind; winter locked up the waves
in an icy bond, until came another
year to the lands, as it still does now,
those that continually observe the seasons,
the gloriously-bright weather. Then winter passed,
beautiful was the breast of the earth. The exile hastened
the guest from the dwellings. He of vengeance
thought exceedingly, rather than to the sea-course;
if he might accomplish a meeting with his foe,
for he contemplated within the sons of the Jutes.
So he did not refuse the world’s custom,
When Hunlaf’s son placed the gleaming sword,
The best of blades, onto his lap.
Those edges were renowned among giants.
And thus cruel sword-torment happened then
To brave-minded Finn in his own home.
Later, after their sea-voyage, Guðlaf and Oslaf
Spoke of that sorrow, the grim attack,
Complained of their share of woes. A restless spirit could not
Be contained within the breast. Then the hall was bedecked
With the bodies of enemies, and Finn, too, was slain,
A king among his company, and his queen taken.
Scylding warriors carried to the ship
All of the earth-king’s worldly goods,
All that they could find at Finn’s home
of jewels and gemwork. On the sea, they
carried the noble lady to the Danes,
led her to the people. A song was sung,
a gleeman’s tale. Games again arose,
and revelry resounded; cupbearers brought forth
wine out of wondrous vessels. Then Wealhtheow came forth,
walked beneath her golden crown to where those brave ones,
both of them, sat, nephew and uncle.
Still then was their bond intact, each
to the other true. Likewise, there Unferth the Orator
sat at the feet of the Scyldings’ lord.
Every one of them trusted in his heart
that he had great spirit, though he to his kinsmen
was not honor-bound at swordplay.
Then said the lady of the Scyldings:
“Take this cup, my noble lord, giver of treasure. May you be in health,
goldfriend of men, and speak to the Geats with mild words as a
man ought to do. Be gracious with the Geats, mindful of gifts from
near and far which you now have. Someone has said to me that you
would have the warrior as a son. Heorot is cleansed, the bright ringhall. Enjoy while you may many rewards and leave community and
kingdom to your kin when you must go forth to face your destiny.
I know, my glad Hrothulf, that he will hold the young ones in honor
if you, O Lord of the Scyldings, should leave the world before he does.
“I trust that he will rightfully repay
Our children, if he thinks about everything
That the two of us gladly and honorably
Did for his sake when he was young.”
Then she turned to the seats, her sons there
Hrethric and Hrothmund, and warriors’ boys,
The gathered youth. There the good man sat,
Beowulf the Geat, by the two brothers.
They brought him the full cup with friendship
An offering made good with words and gold,
Two arm-rings were in friendship given,
Armor and finery, and the greatest neck-chain
That I have ever known there was on earth.
No better has ever been heard of under the sky,
In the precious hoards of heroes, since Hama stole
the Brosings’ necklace off towards the battle-bright stronghold,
jewel and treasure-cup. He fled the treacherous hostility
Of Eormanric chose eternal good fortune.
Hygelac the Geat, grandson of Swerting,
Had that ring on his last venture,
When under the banner he defended treasure,
Defended slaughter-plunder. Fate took him,
Afterwards, because of pride, he asked for misery,
Feud against Frisians. He then carried the ornament,
Precious stones, over the waves’ cup,
Almighty ruler. He fell beneath the rimmed shield.
The body of the king passed then into the Franks’ grasp,
Breast-corslet and the ring together.
Worse warriors rifled dead bodies
After the slaughter in battle. People of the Geats
Possessed the place of corpses. The hall received applause,
Wealhtheow spoke. She spoke before the company:
“Beowulf, dear warrior, enjoy this circlet
in luck, and make use of this mail shirt,
treasure of a people, and prosper well,
be brave and strong, and to these boys be
benign in counsel—I will reward you for that.
You have brought it about that men will praise you
far and near, always and forever, just as widely as the seas, home of the winds,
encompass the cliffs. Be while you live
fortunate, O prince! I wish you well
with these treasures. Be to my sons
proper in your deeds, as a benefactor!
Here each earl is true to the other,
mild in his mind, protects his lord,
the thanes united, the nation fully prepared;
the warriors, having drunk a pledge of loyalty, will do as I command.”
Then she went to her seat. There was the choicest of feasts,
Men flushed with wine. They knew not Wyrd,
Grim creation of old, as it had happened to come
To many of the earls when the evening came.
And with it, Hrothgar went towards his dwelling,
The ruler to rest. The hall held
A countless number of earls, as they often ere did.
They bared the bench-boards. It was overspread
With beds and bolsters. One of the beer-servants,
Ready and doomed, bowed to floor-rest.
Set by him, towards the heads, bossed shields,
Bright wooden boards. There on the bench, was
over a prince easily seen
war-hardened helmet, ringed coat of mail,
stout spear. It was their custom
to be continually battle-ready
both at home and on campaign, wherever they were,
whatever occasion their lord
had need. They were a fierce band of brothers.
Then they sank into sleep. One paid a sore penalty for
slumber, as it very often came to pass,
when Grendel visited the gold hall,
performing evil until the conclusion came,
death due to crimes. Evidenced,
widely known, an avenger still lived
after the hateful one, a long time
after war-strife. Grendel’s mother,
the lady trouble-maker remembered misery,
she, who had to inhabit the horrible water
the cold currents, after conflict arose through Cain—
a sword slayer to a solitary brother,
a father’s son. He went forth stained,
marked by the murder, fled man’s pleasures
dwelled in the wild. From him awoke many
doomed demons. Grendel was one of these,
the fiendish savage foe who found at Heorot
a wakeful man waiting for battle.
There the creature came to grips with him.
Yet he remembered the mighty strength,
