the generous gift which God gave him,
and he relied on the One Ruler’s favor
for security and support. By this he overcame the fiend,
humbled that hell-spirit. Then he departed,
that foe of mankind, wretched, deprived of joy,
to seek death’s dwelling. And so his mother,
ravening and brokenhearted, set out on
her sorrowing way to avenge the death of her son.
She came to Heorot, where the Ring-Danes
Slept within the hall. Those inside soon suffered
A grave misfortune when Grendel’s mother
Invaded their haven. The terror was the less
Only so much as a maiden’s skill,
A woman’s war-terror, compares to an armed man’s
When a well-gripped weapon, a hammer-forged
And bloodstained sword with a keen edge,
Carves through the boar-crest of the war-helm before it.
Then in the hall hard-edged weapons were seized,
sword over seats, many broad-shields
held fast in hands. Helm not remembered,
nor large byrnie, when that horror befell him.
She was in haste, she wished out from there,
to protect her life, when she was found out.
Quickly she had one of the princes
fast gripped, when she went to the fen.
That was Hrothgar’s most beloved warrior
in the retainer’s role between the seas,
powerful warrior, he who she killed at rest,
the glorious man. Beowulf was not there,
for another dwelling was appointed earlier
After the gift-giving, to the noble Geat.
A cry arose in Heorot. She in gore took
the famous arm. Sorrow was renewed,
returned to the settlement. Nor was it a good exchange, that those
on both sides should pay with the lives of friends. Then the wise king,
the grey-haired warrior, was troubled at heart when he learned that
his chief thegn no longer lived—his dearest companion was dead.
Quickly, Beowulf, the victorious warrior, was fetched to the king’s
chamber. At daybreak the noble warrior went with his retainers
to where the wise king waited, wondering whether God Almighty
would ever improve his misfortune. Beowulf, the distinguished
warrior, crossed the floor with his companions—the hall-wood
resounded—and with words addressed the wise one,
the leader of the Ingwings; he asked him if
the night was agreeable to his desire.
Hrothgar spoke, leader of the Scyldings:
“Ask you not for joy. Sorrow is renewed
for the Danish people. Æschere is dead,
Yrmenlaf’s older brother,
my confidant, and my counselor,
and the closest companion, when we in war
defended our heads, when the foot soldiers clashed
and struck the boar helms. An earl should be such,
to be tried and true, Æshere was such a man!
There arose before him in Heorot a hand-slayer
a restless slaughtering demon. I know not whither
the terrible one, glorying in the carcass, returned after
it was made bold by its fill.
She avenged the blood-feud
in which you killed Grendel last night
in a violent manner, with a hard grip,
because for too long
he diminished and destroyed my people. He died in the fight,
forfeited his life. And now another has come,
a mighty manslayer, she wishes to avenge her kin,
and has taken vengeance too far in that feud,
as it may seem to many a thane
who weeps in his heart for his treasure-giver.
Severe distress! Now the man lies lifeless,
the one who supported you in all things.
This I heard earth-dwellers among my people,
my hall-counselors, say:
that they have seen two such otherworldly spirits,
great marsh walkers, holding the moors,
spirits from elsewhere. The second of the two bore,
as far as men could certainly discern,
the likeness of a woman. The other wretched one
trod the paths of exile in the form of a man,
yet he was larger than any other man.
That one in days gone by they called Grendel.
Earth-dwellers never knew of his father
nor whether any was born to him before,
of evil spirits. They haunt a secret land,
wolf-slopes, windy headlands,
and fierce fen-passages, where an inland stream
under the cliffs’ mists descends,
a flood under the earth. In mile-marks it is not far
from here that the mere stands.
Over it hangs frost-covered groves,
woods firm with roots stretch over the water.
Each night one can see there a horrible wonder,
fire on the lake. No wise man lives
among the sons of men who might know that depth.
If the heath-stepper, harried by hounds,
the strong-horned hart put to flight from afar,
should seek the woods, he would sooner give his life,
his heart, on the bank, before he plunge in
to hold on to his head. That is no lovely place!
The mingling wave lifts up from it,
dark to the clouds when the wind stirs
a hateful storm, until the air grows wan
and the heavens weep. Help depends now
on you alone: yet this land you don’t know:
this perilous ground where you can find
The sinful man. Seek him if you dare;
For that feud I will reward you with riches,
Ancient treasures, and twisted gold,
As I did before, if you were to come back safe.”
Beowulf spoke, the son of Ecgtheow:
“Grieve not, wise man. It is better for each man
To avenge his friend when he mourns greatly.
Each of us shall experience the end of
Worldly life; let him who may
Achieve glory before death. This is the best
For warriors, after they are dead.
Arise, ward of the kingdom, let us fare quickly,
To follow Grendel’s mother’s trail.
I promise you this: in no refuge shall she escape,
Neither in earth’s bosom, nor in mountain forest,
nor the bottom of the ocean, let it go wherever it will. Today you
must endure every one of your troubles, as I believe you will.” Then
the old and wise one leapt to his feet, gave thanks to God, the mighty
Lord, for the words that the man had spoken. Then a bridle was
put onto a horse for Hrothgar, a steed with a braided mane. The
wise leader, the magnificent one rode forward. The foot-soldiers
advanced, carrying their shields. The tracks could be seen far and
wide, paths through the forest. The creature had gone across the
ground, travelled in a straight line over the dark waste-land, carried
the young retainer, inanimate, the best of those who guarded the
homestead with Hrothgar. Then the descendant of princes travelled
over steep stone cliffs, strait paths,
narrow tracks, an unknown way,
sheer headlands, many homes of water-creatures.
He fared in front with a handful
of experienced men to examine the way,
until he suddenly found mountain firs
leaning over leaden stone,
a desolate wood. Water stood below,
blood-red and roiling. For all the Danes
and their Scylding friends it was shocking
in their minds, for many men, to suffer,
anguish to each of them, when they found
on the sea-cliff Æschere’s head.
The waves boiled with blood—the men beheld—
hot with gore.
Time and again a horn sang
a ready war-song. The walking warriors all sat down.
They beheld in the water many a breed of serpents,
strange sea dragons exploring the waters,
sea monsters lying on the slopes of the headland.
In the early morning they often take
a sorrowful journey on the sail-road,
the serpents and wild beasts. They rushed away
fierce and enraged, heard the noise
of the singing war-horn. A man of the Geats
with a bow separated one of the wave-swimmers
from its life so that a hard war-arrow
stood in its body. It was slower
of swimming in the sea when death seized it.
In the waves it was swiftly hard-pressed
with barbed boar-spears,
with force attacked, and dragged onto shore,
the wondrous wave-roamer. Men gazed at
the terrible guest. Beowulf geared himself
with nobleman’s armour, not at all fearful for life;
with his war-coat, hand-braided
broad and well-adorned, he was to explore the water,
that war-coat which could defend the bone-chamber
so that a war-grip may not harm his heart,
nor the ireful one’s malicious grasp his life.
And also the shining helm guarded his head,
he who was to stir the depths of the mere
to seek the surging waters, that helm adorned with treasure,
encircled by noble chains as in ancient days
the weapons’ smith wrought it, wonderfully worked it,
adorned it with boars, so that never thereafter into him
neither blade nor battle-swords were able to bite.
However that was not the meanest of mighty helps
that Hrothgar’s orator lent to him in need.
Hrunting was the name of that hilted sword,
foremost among ancient treasures.
Its edge was iron, gilded with poison,
tempered by bloodshed. Never in battle did it fail
any man who grasped it with his hands,
who dared to go on grim journeys
into the folk-stead of the enemy. This was not the first time
it was obliged to accomplish valorous deeds.
Indeed he did not remember— the son of Ecglaf,
powerful of might— that which he spoke before,
drunk with wine, when he lent that weapon
to a more able swordsman. Himself he dared not
to risk his life under the turmoil of the waves,
to accomplish valor. He forfeited glory there,
renown for courageous deeds. It was not thus for the other man,
once he had armed himself for battle.
Beowulf spoke, son of Ecgtheow,
“Keep it in your mind, famous son of Halfdane,
Wise prince, now that I am eager for a journey,
Gold-friend of men, what the two of us spoke about earlier:
If in your need I should lose my life,
That you would always be as a father to me, even after I have departed.
Be a guardian to my young retainers,
my close companions, if battle takes me.
Likewise, send to Hygelac those treasures
that you have given me, dear Hrothgar.
Then in that gold, may the lord of the Geats understand,
Hrethel’s son see when he stares on that treasure,
that I with manly virtue found an excellent
distributor of rings, I used them while I could.
And you, let Unferth, the well-known man, have the ancient heirloom,
the wondrous, wave-patterned, hard-edged sword.
I myself with Hrunting will accomplish victory or death will take me!”
After those words the man of the Weder-Geats
hastened with courage. He did not wish to wait for an answer.
The sea-surge received the warrior.
Then it took the length of a day
before he could perceive the ground.
She discovered this immediately, she who, sword-greedy,
held for a hundred half-years the expanse of the floods,
grim and greedy, found that someone explored the dwelling
of monsters from above.
She seized at him, caught the warrior
in terrifying clutches; yet she didn’t injure
the hale body within; the ring mail protected him from the outside
so that she couldn’t pierce the war-covering,
the linked mail-shirt, with her loathsome fingers.
The sea-wolf bore the prince of rings to her home
when he came to the bottom of the mere
So that he couldn’t—however brave he was—
wield his weapons, but so many strange creatures,
many sea beasts, drove hard through the water,
broke his army-shirt with battle-tusks,
dogged the assailant. Then the warrior knew
that he was in a certain hostile hall
where no water at all could reach him,
for the roofed hall would not let
the flood’s grasp touch him. He saw firelight,
a beaming brilliance, brightly shining.
Then the good man saw that outcast of the deep,
the mighty woman of the mere. He gave a great blow
with the battle-sword—he did not hold back the hand swing—
his ring-adorned sword sang on her head
a greedy war-song. Then the guest found
that the battle-flame would not bite,
nor harm her life, but the sword failed
the prince in his need—before, it had often endured
a clash of hands, had cut through armour,
the war-gear of the doomed. That was the first time
with the precious gift, that its reputation had failed.
Afterwards, not at all lacking in zeal, he was of one mind,
The kinsman of Hygelac, mindful of glory:
He then threw the curve-marked sword, bound with ornaments,
An angry warrior, so that it lay on the ground,
Hard and steel-edged. He trusted in strength,
A hand-grip of power. So must a man do,
When he thinks to gain in battle
Long-lasting fame. He never cares about his life.
By no means did he mourn on account of the feud.
He then seized by the shoulder
The man of the Battle-Geats, Grendel’s mother.
Then when he was swollen with rage, hard in battle, he flung
The life-enemy so that she sank onto the floor.
She quickly afterwards gave him requital
In the grips of a fierce one, and seized him in return.
Weary-hearted, the strongest of warriors,
Of foot-warriors, made an attack, so that he was falling.
She then pinned the hall-guest down, and drew her seax,
Broad, brown-edged. She wanted to avenge her child,
Her one son. On his shoulder lay
A woven breast-net; that protected life,
Against sword and against edge, stood against entry.
The son of Ecgtheow would have perished,
The champion of the Geats, under that broad ground,
If the battle-net had not brought help to him,
The hard battle-mail. And holy God
Controlled the battle-victory. The wise Lord,
The ruler of the heavens, decided it on the right side,
Easily. Afterwards he stood up again.
He saw among the war gear a victory-blessed sword,
An ancient sword made by giants, strong in its edges,
worthy sword of warriors the best of weapons—
but it was more than other men
could bear to battle-sport,
good and richly geared, a work of giants.
The Scyldings’ strong one seized the linked hilt,
savage and sword-grim, drew the ring-marked sword
spurning his life, angrily struck
so that the sword sank deep in her spine,
broke bone-rings; the blade bit through
the fated flesh, she fell on the floor;
the blade was bloody, Beowulf exulted in his work.
A gleam glittered, stood glowing within
even as the sky’s candle shines brightly
from heaven. He gazed through the hall;
then Hygelac’s thane turned to the wall
hefted his weapon
firmly by the hilt, the thane of Hygelac
angry and resolute. Nor was the blade useless
to the warrior, but rather he wished at once
to repay Grendel for the many assaults
which he had carried out against the West-Danes,
much more often than on one occasion,
when he the hearth-companions of Hrothgar
slew in their slumber, devoured while they were sleeping
fifteen men of the Danish folk
and as many again he carried off,
a loathsome plunder. He paid Grendel back for this,
the fierce warrior, insofar as he saw on his resting-place
