over Hrothgar’s treasure-hoard.
Then, he gave to the boat-warden a goldbound
sword, so that later on the mead-bench
he was worthier by that treasure,
that heirloom. He went out in the boat
to stir the deep water, left the land of the Danes.
Then a certain sea-garment next to the mast, a sail,
was made fast with a rope. The sea-wood groaned.
Thereafter the wind over the waves hindered not
the wave-floater on its way. Forth over the swell
that sea-goer fared, floated foamy-necked,
a bound-stemmed vessel over the ocean-streams,
until the crew could perceive the cliffs of the Geats,
the familiar bluffs. The ship shot forward and up,
driven by the strong wind. It stood on the land.
Quickly at the water was the harbor-guard ready—
the one who, for a long time, alert at the coast,
had been looking far out for the much-loved men.
He moored to the shore the roomy ship
anchor-cable fast, lest the wave’s heaving
should drive away those pleasing beams.
Then he commanded a prince’s treasure to be carried up,
ornaments and pressed gold. They needed not go far
to find the giver of riches,
Higelac the Hrethling, waiting there at home
himself with companions, near the sea-wall.
Great was that dwelling, brave the King,
in his high-hall. Queen Hygd very young,
wise and well-proven, though few winters
she had dwelled beneath the stronghold-roof,
Hæreth’s daughter. She was nevertheless not stingy,
nor too miserly to the people of the Geats,
with gifts of treasure. Modthryth,
famous folk-queen, committed a terrible crime.
None of the ‘fierce’ fighters but her husband dared to gaze upon
her eyes after that doomed day. For him, the protection of those
perilous-peers was prescribed, twisted by her hand, and swiftly
subjected to almighty agony. After the grasp of hands, a falchion was
fashioned so that it may infamously cut to declare deadly evils. It
was not quite the queenly behaviour one wants from a woman, but
she was peerless, that peaceweaver, denying after dubious distress
the lives of commendable kinsmen. Regardless—one drunken aledrinker disclosed that Hemming’s hooded hero came after that,
after which she needed not to advance assaults or artful enmity, when it happened,
she was given gold-veiled to the young hero,
noble beloved, to Offa’s hall
over the flashing waves, because of her father’s counsel,
she sought to sail.
For a while afterward she made good
use of her condition in life and her place on the throne, celebrated
for her goodness. She held a deep love for the lord of heroes: the
best of all mankind, as far as I know, the best of all the human race
between the two seas. Because of this, Offa was a spear-keen man in
gifts and in war, honored far and wide, and he held the power of his
homeland through wisdom. From him came Eomer, a help to heroes,
Hemming’s kinsman and Garmund’s grandson, cunning in the face
of strife.
With his hand-picked troop, the brave one himself
went along sand to tread the sea-plain,
the broad beaches. The world-candle shone,
sun eager from the south. They had performed that journey,
courageously went to the protector of earls,
the slayer of Ongentheow, deep inside the fortress;
they knew the good, young battle-king
was disbursing rings. Beowulf’s arrival was
immediately reported to Higelac:
that the protector of warriors was in the precinct;
a shield-companion had arrived living, unharmed from the battle-play,
to walk toward the court. The floor within was quickly cleared
for the foot-guests, just as the ruler commanded.
Then he sat himself down, he who had survived the conflict,
one kinsmen facing the other as soon as the lord of men
greeted the loyal one through diplomatic discourse,
with earnest words. With mead cups making rounds
throughout the hall, Haereth’s daughter
showed love to the people as she bore the drinking vessel
into the hands of heroes. But Higelac began
to question his comrade courteously
in the high hall—curiosity about what happened
on the journey of the Sea-Geats broke him:
“How did it go with you on your trip, dear Beowulf,
when you suddenly thought to seek
conflict far off over the salt water,
battle at Heorot? Did you better
the well-known troubles of Hrothgar,
the famous prince, even a little bit?
Because of that I brooded with
sorrowful cares, with anxiety in my heart; I did not have faith in
the journey of a dear man. I pleaded with you for a long while that
you should not visit that murderous creature at all, that you should
allow the South-Danes to handle the battle with Grendel themselves.
I say thanks to God because I am able to see you whole.” Beowulf spoke, child of Ecgtheow: “That great encounter is not
hidden from many men, Lord Hygelac, what time of pain Grendel
and I shared together in the place where he performed measureless
sorrows, constant miseries for the Victory-Shieldings. I avenged all
that, thus less the evil of Grendel’s kin over the earth needs to boast
about the night-clash,
whoever lives longest of that hateful race,
seized utterly by sin. Once there, I came first
to the ring-hall, to hail Hrothgar.
Straightaway that great son of Healfdene
—as soon as he grasped my heart’s thoughts—
pointed me to a seat with his own sons.
The troop took its pleasure. Never have I seen in the breadth
of my life under heaven’s course a greater joy among hall-sitters
for the fellowship of mead. From time to time, the resplendent queen,
the peace-bond of peoples, turned about the floor,
bolstered the young boys, and often gave a winding of gold
to a warrior, before going back to her seat.
And again and again, before the assembly of noblemen,
Hrothgar’s daughter carried the ale-cup to each in turn.
Then I heard the men gathered on that floor
call her Freawaru as she poured from the studded treasure
for those brave ones. It is said she is betrothed,
that gold-decked maiden, to the gracious son of Froda.
The Scyldings’ caretaker has made this come to pass,
the friend to his kingdom, for he trusts the counsel
that by means of this bride he may buy off the feud,
this share of slaughter. Very seldom, though,
after a nation’s fall, does the murdering spear
lay low for long, no less so for a blameless bride.
It will be displeasing to the prince of the Heathobards
and to every one of the thanes of that people,
when he crosses the floor with that woman:
the high-born of the Danish troop, so well-received,
on them shimmering the spoils of ancient bounty
the ring-mail and close-hewn treasures of the Heathobards—
the while they were able to wield those heirloom weapons.
XXIX–XXX
Until they have led their loved ones
and their own lives into destruction in shield-play.
Then, the old spear warrior who sees the ring,
he who remembers the spear-slaughter of men,
will speak at beer-drinking—his heart will be bitter within him—
Sad of spirit, he will begin to test a young warrior,
To awaken war-strife through thoughts of the breast
and he will say these words:
‘Can you, my friend, recognize the sword,
the precious blade which your father
under an army-helm carried to battle for the last time?
There the Danes, the brave Scyldings, slew him;
they controlled the slaughter place
since Withergyld lay dead, after the fall of heroes.
Now the son of one or another of those slayers,
exulting in weapons, walks on the floor of the hall,
boasts of murders, and wears the treasures
that you rightfully should possess.’
Thus he urges and reminds on every occasion
with bitter words, until the time comes
that the woman’s thane for his father’s deeds
sleeps bloodstained after the sword’s bite,
having forfeited life. The other one thence
escapes alive—he knows the land well.
Then the oath of earls will be broken
on both sides. After that, deadly hate
boils up in Ingeld and in him love for his wife
after seething sorrow, becomes cooler.
Therefore I do not consider the Heatho-Bards’ loyalty
a measure of sincere peace with the Danes,
a firm friendship. I ought to go on telling
further about Grendel, that you will know well,
giver of treasure, what came after
of the warriors’ handfight. After heaven’s jewel
glided over the earth, the angry demon came,
dire night terror to attack us,
where we, safe, guarded the hall.
There Hondscio was taken in battle,
by deadly evil fated to die. He first lay dead,
belted champion. Famous young thane,
Grendel was his devourer,
the body of the beloved man all swallowed up.
Yet not before out of there emptyhanded
the bloody-toothed slayer, intent on destruction
wanted to go out of that goldhall.
But he, strong, made trial of my strength,
gripped with eager hand. A glove hung,
wide and strange, secured with well-wrought bands;
it was dexterously all adorned
with demonic skill and dragon skin.
To put me in there, innocent,
that dire leader desired to do,
as one of many. He might not do it,
once I in anger stood upright.
It is too long to tell how I the harmer of that land
for each of his evils offered reward.
There I, my lord, lent your people
honor with my deeds. He escaped the hall,
for a little while enjoyed life-joys.
However, his right hand remained as a remnant
in Heorot, and wretched, he went home
sad in mind sank to the mere’s floor.
For that slaughter-attack the lord of the Shieldings
much adorned gold made over to me,
many treasures, once morning came,
and we filed onto benches to feast.
There was song and music. An elder of the Shieldings,
knowing much, narrated times long past.
Sometimes the one daring in battle the harp’s delight,
the joy-wood played; sometimes he performed a song
true and sad; sometimes a wondrous story.
He recounted rightly, the generous-hearted ruler.
Sometimes again began the old one to bind in story,
the elder battle-warrior, to recall youth,
war-strength. Heart surged within,
when he, wise with winters, recalled so much.
So all-day-long inside there
we took our pleasure, until night came,
following upon men. Then quickly
Grendel’s mother was ready to avenge her wrong.
She journeyed full of sorrow; death had taken her son,
war-hate of the Weders. The fierce woman
avenged her son, killed a warrior
boldly; there from Æschere,
the wise old counsellor, the life was departed.
Nor were they able, once morning came,
the Danish people, to burn him, death-weary,
with brands, nor to place him on the fire,
the beloved man; she took that body away
into the fiend’s embrace under the mountain-stream.
That was the harshest of griefs for Hrothgar,
of those which had long befallen the people-chief.
Then the prince, troubled in mind, for your life
implored me, that I, in the tumult of the waves,
should perform a noble deed, risk my life,
achieve glory; he promised me reward.
I then, in that surging water, as is widely known,
found a fierce, terrible guardian of the bottom of the lake.
There for a time we two fought hand-to-hand;
water welled with blood, and I cut off the head,
inside that deep hall, of Grendel’s mother,
with mighty edges. Not easily did I get away from there
with my life. I wasn’t doomed for death just yet.
But afterwards the protector of warriors gave me
Many treasures, Healfdene’s kinsman.
So the king bowed to custom.
I had not lost sight of the reward,
might’s mead, Healfdene’s son
gave me gifts to match my glory’s thirst.
To you, king of men, I will bring treasures,
present them with grace. All favours
are yet owed to you. I have few
close kinsmen, Hygelac, excepting you.”
Then he bid them bring in the boar’s emblem,
the battle-high helmet, the grey horror-coat,
the patterned war-sword; a speech followed:
“Hrothgar gave this battle-gear to me,
wise king. He asked that first I
might say something of its story:
he spoke of how it was long held
by King Heorogar, man of the Scyldings,
yet he did not wish to give that chest-mail
to his son, brave Heoroward,
loyal though he was. Bear it well.”
I heard that four apple-brown steeds
came swiftly in the wake of the war-gear;
he bestowed on him the gift
of treasure and horses. So a kinsman should,
instead of weaving, with dark craft,
a net of deceit, devising the death
of a comrade in arms. To Hygelac,
strong when laid low, his nephew was steadfast,
each looked out for the other.
I heard that he handed over to Hygd
that neck-ring—
the one which Wealhtheow had willed unto him,
daughter of a lord,
the intricately-crafted marvel-treasure—
together with three horses
graceful and gleaming in their saddles.
Afterwards, upon the receiving of that ring, her breast was embellished.
So did the son of Ecgtheow show himself stalwart;
a man familiar with fighting, and with good deeds.
He bore himself to a strict standard:
not in the least did he drunkenly slay his hearth-companions,
nor did trouble harry his heart.
But, battle-brave and with the keenest skill,
he kept hold to that great gift which God had granted him.
Actually, for a long time, he was miserable
because the sons of the Geats thought him no good at all,
and the lord of the Weders wish to make him worthy of much on the mead-bench.
They solemnly swore he was slothful,
an enfeebled freeloader. But there came to that famous man
a turning-about of his fortune for every hardship he suffered.
Then the protector of warriors,
the brave in battle king, commanded to be brought in
the heirloom of Hreðel, adorned with gold;
not at all among the Geats then was there
a better treasure in the form of a sword.
That treasure he laid in Beowulf’s lap
and gave him seven thousand hides of land
a hall and a princely seat. To both together was
inherited land in that nation, a home and ancestral right,
but the more broad kingdom was for the better one.
In turn it took place in later days
in the crash of battles, after Hygelac lay dead
and for Heardred the battle swords under the
shields became killers,
when the Battle Scylfings, the hard warriors,
sought him among the victorious people
attacked with hostility the nephew of Hereric.
It was then that the broad kingdom came
into Beowulf’s hands; he held it well
for fifty winters—wise was then the aged king,
old guardian of the land of the Geats—till one began
to dominate in the darkness of the night: a dragon
who in his high dwelling kept watch over his hoard,
a steep stone barrow, beneath it a path lay
unknown to all. Inside there one man went,
unnamed, who happened to come upon
