all the joys of home for your kin,
shall end. Each man of your tribe
will wander, deprived
of his land-right, once far-flung
nobles hear of your flight,
your dishonorable deed. Death is better
for an earl than a life of shame.”
He ordered the battle-work made known to the camp
up by the bluff, where the band of brothers
sat with mournful minds all the morning long,
shield-bearers, in expectation either of
the final day, or of the return
of the beloved man. On few of the new tidings
was he who rode the headland silent,
but he spoke truly over all:
“Now is the wish-giver of the Wederas’ nation,
the lord of the Geats, fixed to his death-bed
settled on the seat of the slain because of the serpent’s deeds.
Beside him lies his fatal foe
sick with sax-wounds; he could not with his sword
on that fiend in any way
wreak wounds. Wiglaf sits
over Beowulf, son of Weohstan,
one earl over the other unliving,
he holds a head-vigil, weary in mind,
over the beloved and the loathed. Now on the nation is the expectation
of a time of war, when revealed
to the Franks and the Frisians the fall of the king
widely becomes. The feud was shaped
harshly against the Hugas, when Hygelac came
faring with the fleet onto the Frisians’ land.
There the Hetware humbled him in battle
with an overwhelming show of strength; it happened in courage
that the byrnie-clad soldier had to bow down.
He fell among footsoldiers. No treasures at all gave
the lord to his retinue. Since then, to us
the Merovingian’s favour has been denied.
Neither peace nor favour
I expect from the Swedes, for it was wide known
that Ongenðeow severed Hæðcyn from life
the son of Hreþel, near Ravenswood,
when for pride the Geats first
attacked the warring Scylfings.
Soon the wise father of Othere,
old and fearsome, returned the onslaught,
destroyed the sea-king, rescued his wife:
an old woman deprived of her gold,
Onela’s mother and Ohthere’s.
And then he hunted down the Geats, his mortal foes,
until they fled with great trouble
into the Ravenswood, lordless.
Then with a huge army he assailed them, the remains of his sword,
wound-weary survivors. Often all along the night, he threatened misery
to that wretched army,
he promised he would, in the morning, on the sword blade
gut open some on the gallows-trees
as amusement for his soldiers. Once more comfort came
to the sad-hearted ones, together at early day,
when they the horn and trumpet of Higelac,
their sound they heard, when the strong one came
to the proven warriors of the people traveling on the track.
That bloody trail of Swedes and Geats,
the bloody onslaught of men, was widely seen.
How those people with him awoke hostility!
Then he went, the brave one, with his kinsmen,
old, downcast, to search for his stronghold.
The noble Ongentheow went farther away,
he had heard of Higelac’s battle-mastery,
the war-craft of the bold one. He had no faith in resistance,
that he might withstand the sea-men,
defend the hoard, children, and women
from those traveling to battle. From there the old man
afterward made for underneath the earthwall. Then was chase given
to the Swedish people, Hygelac’s banner.
They forged ahead across that field of refuge,
as the Hreðlings crowded toward the enclosure.
There Ongenðiow was, gray-haired,
brought to a halt by blades, swords
so that the king should submit
to the sole judgement of Eofor. Angrily
Wulf Wonreðing struck him with a weapon,
such that, owing to the hit, blood sprang forth
in streams below his hair. He was not afraid, however,
the old Scylfing, but quickly repaid
that assault with a worse exchange,
when the people’s king returned.
Not sufficiently swift was Wonred’s son
to finish off that aged noble,
he who cut through that helmet into his head
so that he, covered with wicked enemy blood,
fell to the ground. Not yet destined to die,
he saved himself despite the wound touching him.
It was allowed to the rugged servant of Higelac
with his broad sword, when his brother fell,
to raise his ancient gigantic sword over that colossal helmet,
over the protective shields. Then the beaten ruler —
guardian of the people, barely alive, dropped.
Many were there, wrapping his brother’s wounds,
instantly making room for him, exalted,
while they were conquering the mighty killing field.
Then one warrior plundered the other.
He took from Ongenthio an iron mail-coat,
A hard, hilted sword, and his helmet, too.
To Hygelac he carried the armor of the frost-haired one;
He accepted those trappings, and fairly promised him
Rewards among the people, and made it so.
The prince of the Geats paid for the battle-rush,
The son of Hrethel, when he came to his home,
With an excess of treasure for Iofor and for Wulf.
He gave to each of them a hundred thousand things,
Lands and interlocked rings: none needed
To impeach that payment, no man on middle-earth,
After they struck down the greater, more famous man.
And then he gave to Iofor his own daughter,
As a grace for his home, with honor as a pledge.
Now that is the fright and that is the foe-hood
mortal threat to men, mighty hatred,
that forsooth I expect from Swedish people
once the wind they get of our warlord’s drawing
his final breath, he who barred for years
the treacherous enemies from treasure and land,
his retainers might fall, but unflinchingly the warrior
to his country tended, a true leader of men,
beyond measure. Now we better make haste
and do your duty, behold our dear king
and help him onwards, the offerer of ringlets,
onto the funeral pyre. Not a fraction meagre
shall melt with the mighty one, but that whole mound there,
ill-begotten, of gold beyond count,
for its price is loathsome— his life itself it was
as bought the bracelets. Thus to burn is their fate,
to be charred by fire; no champion shall have
any treasure to toy with, no trinkets shining,
nor a maiden her neck with necklace adorn,
for we shall all in despair, dispossessed of gold,
not once, but many times be exiled from homeland,
now that the lord of battle is of laughter bereft,
is starved of merriment. Now steely spears
on chilly mornings champions numerous
in hands will clasp, for no harp’s sounds
will warriors wake, but woeful raven’s
clamorous cackle, as clawing the dead
to the falcon he boasts of feasting gloriously
on yet writhing bodies, with wolf for company!”
These were the words of the warrior valiant,
of dreadful tidings. He did not lie at all
in deeds or words. The warband all rose,
went grieving under Earnanæs
with scalding tears to see the wonder.
There on the sand they found, soulless,
holding his rest-bed, the one who gave them rings
in earlier times. Then had the end-day
come for that good man, the war-king,
Prince of the Wederas; he died an awesome death.
But first they had seen a rarer creature,
dragon on the plain, lying opposite there,
dreadful. It was the firedragon,
grim horrorguest, burnt by flames.
He was fifty foot-measures
Long as he lay. In air-joy he had ruled
at night-time, and afterwards went down
to seek his den. Then he was fixed in death,
he had made his last use of earth-caves.
Goblets and cups stood beside him,
dishes and precious swords lay,
rusted, eaten-through, as though they had remained there
for a thousand winters, in the earth’s embrace.
Indeed, that mighty legacy,
the gold of ancient men, was surrounded by a spell,
so that no man could reach the ring-cave
unless God himself,
the true king of victories, permitted him whom He wished—
He is the protector of men—to open the hoard,
even to such men as seemed fitting to Him.
Then it was evident that the undertaking was not profitable
for the one who wrongfully hid
his misery within, under the wall. The guardian earlier slew
an extraordinary man. Then the feud was
cruelly avenged. It is a wonder then, where
a brave nobleman may reach the end
of his fated life, when he can no longer,
a man among his kinsmen, inhabit the mead-hall.
So it was for Beowulf, when he sought out the barrow’s guardian,
his cunning hostilities. He himself did not know
how his parting from the world should come about.
Thus the great lords, who placed the treasure there,
solemnly declared it so until doomsday,
that a man would be guilty of crimes,
imprisoned in pagan shrines, fixed in hell-bonds,
punished with misfortunes, should he plunder that place.
He who had earlier beheld
the owner’s mercy was not gold-greedy.
Wihstan’s son Wiglaf spoke.
“Often many men will come to grief
by one man’s will, as has happened to us.
No counsel could persuade
the beloved prince, the kingdom’s keeper,
that he should not attack the gold-guardian
but let him lie where he long had been,
occupying his dwellings until world’s end.
He seized his high destiny. The hoard has been seen,
won with pain. That fate which drove
him here was too powerful.
I was in there and when a way was cleared
for me, studied all the hall’s treasures—
the path in beneath the earth wall
was not at all easily won.
In haste I seized
with my hands a great and mighty burden
of hoard-treasures, bore it out here
to my king. He was still alive then,
wise and conscious: a great many things spoke
that ancient one in sorrow, and commanded you to be greeted,
bade that, in accordance with our friend’s deeds, you make
the high barrow on the pyre-place
great and glorious—since he was of men
the most worthy of warriors widely throughout the earth
while he was able to enjoy the fortress-wealth.
Let us now hasten a second time
to see and seek the heap of precious gems,
wonders under the wall—I will guide you,
so that you may see nearby
plenty of rings and gold galore. Let the bier be ready,
quickly prepared, when we come out,
and then we may lead our lord,
the beloved man, where he must long remain
in the Creator’s care.”
Then the son of Wihstan ordered an announcement,
the battle-hardened hero, to many of the warriors,
the hall-rulers, that they, the people’s leaders,
should carry the pyre-wood from afar
to the good man. “Now must the fire,
the dim flame growing, feed on the chief of warriors,
who often endured the hail of iron points
when the storm of arrows, flung with force,
shot over the shieldwall. The shaft did its duty,
hastening in its feather-gear, aided by its arrow-head.”
But Weohstán’s wise son,
Called forth from the troop of king’s thegns,
Seven together, the best.
They went, eight in all, under the hostile roof
One of the warriors, he who walked in front,
Bore shining fire in his hand.
Nor were lots drawn for any part of that hoard,
By those who plundered it, now unguarded and useless
as men saw it, lying in the hall.
Little any mourned that they hastily carried out
the costly treasures. The dragon also they discarded,
the worm over the cliff wall, letting the wave,
the flood’s embrace, take the guardian of precious things.
Twisted gold, the never-ending treasure,
they loaded on the cart carrying the prince,
the grey-haired hero, to Whale’s Headland.
For him, for him the Geats make ready
a pyre upon the earth, a splendid one.
Helmets hang round it, shields battle-worn,
shiny mail-coats – just as he wanted.
Grieving warriors lay among them
the famous prince, their hero, their beloved
lord. They light it up, the biggest of pyres
right there on the mound; the wood-smoke rises
in dark billows. The wind—it stops.
The crashing ardour of the flame
mingles with their lament until it breaks
his body, burns the heart.
With sad hearts
they mourned their sorrow of spirit, the death of their lord.
A Geatish woman also sang a song of mourning,
with bound-up hair, she was not lighthearted;
sorrowful, she earnestly said
that she sorely dreaded their invasions,
the great number of slaughters, the troop’s terror,
the humiliation and captivity. Heaven swallowed the smoke.
The people of the Weders then constructed
a mound on the headland; it was high and broad,
widely visible to seafarers,
and they built in ten days
the monument of the battle-bold one on the leavings of the fire.
They constructed a wall, as worthily
as very wise men could devise it.
They placed rings and brooches in the barrow,
all such treasures as hostile men had earlier
taken away from the hoard.
They let the earth hold the wealth of earls,
gold in the sand, where it still lives now;
as useless to men as it was before.
Then the battle-brave sons of nobles
rode around the barrow, twelve in all.
They wished to lament their sorrow and speak of their king,
to recite an elegy and commemorate that man.
They praised his nobility and his brave deeds
that the troop valued, as it is fitting
that a man should praise his lord with words,
honor him in his memory, when he must
be brought forth from his earthly body.
Thus the Geatish people, his hearth-companions,
mourned their lord’s death.
They said that he was a king in the world
mildest of men, and most loyal;
kindest to his people, and most eager for glory.