together, an ash-grove topped with gray; the armed troop was
honored in its weapons. Then the bold warrior
asked those combatants about their own warriors:
“Where do you come from bearing gilt shields,
grey hauberks, and grim helmets,
that band of battle-shafts? I am Hrothgar’s
herald and attendant. I have never seen a foreign host,
so many men, looking more courageous.
I expect that you, because of boldness, not banishment,
and for strength of heart, sought Hrothgar.”
To him then the valor-brave answered,
proud prince of the Weders, pronounced these words,
hardy under his helm: “We are Hygelac’s
table-mates. Beowulf is my name.
I want to tell Halfdane’s son,
that peerless prince, my errand,
to your prince, if he will allow us,
so that we may greet him, this good man.”
Wulfgar spoke formally. He was the Wendels’ prince,
his courage of spirit known to many,
at war and in wisdom: “I will ask
the Danes’ friend, the Scyldings’ ruler,
the giver of rings, as you have requested,
the celebrated prince, about your errand,
that you quickly know the answer
which that good man thinks to give me.”
He turned quickly then to where Hrothgar sat,
old and very grey, with his troop of noblemen.
The braveheart went so that he stood by the shoulder
of the Danes’ ruler. He knew the custom of warriors.
Wulfgar spoke properly to his good lord:
“The Geatish people are led here,
Come from afar over an expanse of sea.
Warriors call the chief one
Beowulf. They are requesting,
My king, that they might
Exchange words with you. Do not refuse them
Your answers, gracious Hrothgar.
In war-equipment, they appear worthy
Of praise from warriors; indeed, the chief
Who lead the warriors hither is powerful.”
Hrothgar, protector of the Scyldings, spoke:
“I knew him as a boy;
His late father was called Ecgtheow;
Hrethel of the Geats gave him his only daughter
As a wife; now his son,
The brave one, has come here to seek a loyal lord.
From Geatland far, whence seamen sailed
Bearing gifts of thanks come tales of one
Whose hand-grip rivals that of thirty men,
A hero of battle-fame. Holy God
For our honor has sent him to us,
The West-Danes, as I would hope,
Against Grendel’s terror. For the good man’s might
And great daring I shall bestow gifts.
Now make haste, call them inside
To look upon my band of kinsmen gathered together.
Tell them in words that they are welcome
To the people of the Danes.” Wulfgar relayed the word:
“My lord bids me to tell you, the victory-lord,
leader of the East-Danes, that he knows of your nobility
and that you have sailed across the sea-wellings.
We welcome you here, spirited ones.
“Now you may come forth in your armor,
Wearing your war-helms, to witness Hrothgar.
However, you must leave your battle-shields,
Your weapons of wood behind while we discuss the matter.”
Then the Geatish ruler rose, surrounded by his loyal retinue,
A splendid troop of thanes.
Some bided there
To keep the battle-gear guarded as the brave one ordered.
Guided by the warrior together they hastened
Under Heorot’s roof. [The warrior strode]
Hardy under helm, ‘til he stood in the hall.
Beowulf spoke, in his shining byrnie,
His battle-net skillfully smithed:
“Be thou, Hrothgar, well. I am Hygelac’s
kinsman and young retainer. In my youth I have
undertaken many glorious things. This thing
with Grendel became apparent to me on my native soil.
Seafarers say that this hall stands,
the best of halls to every man,
idle and useless, since evening’s light
became hidden under the brightness of heaven.
Then persuaded me, mine people,
the best men, the wisest men,
lord Hrothgar, that I you seek
because they knew the strength of my skill;
they themselves had observed, when I came from battle,
bloodstained from the enemy, where I bound five together,
destroyed a family of giants, and in the waves slew
water-monsters by night, endured dire distress,
avenged assaults on the Weders. They asked for that woe,
I crushed the hostile ones. And now with Grendel,
with that miserable wretch, I will by myself hold
a meeting with the giant. Now I ask you,
lord of the Bright-Danes, I would ask you,
shelter of the Shieldings, a single favor,
that you not refuse me, refuge of fighting men,
noble friend of the folk, now I have come thus from afar:
that I myself might, with this troop of my earls
and this hard company, cleanse Heorot.
I have also found out that the foe
in his recklessness disregards weapons.
I will therefore forego them, so that Hygelac,
my liege-lord, may be glad of heart,
scorn that I should bear sword or broad shield,
yellow-board to battle, but with my grip
I shall grapple with the fiend and fight for life,
enemy against enemy. Let him trust
in the Lord’s judgement, he whom death takes!
I expect that he desires, if he is allowed to have mastery
in that war-hall, to feed fearlessly
on the Geatish people just as he often has done,
the strength of the Hrethmen. Nor will you need
to cover my head, but he will have me,
stained with blood, if death takes me.
He will bear my bloody corpse, think to taste it,
to ruthlessly eat the solitary one,
mark his moor-retreat with blood. You need not for a moment
worry about the disposal of my body.
To Higelac send, if battle takes me,
My splendid armor, best of battle-shirts,
My breast’s defender, Hreðel’s gift to me,
The work of Weland. Fate cannot be stopped.”
Thus Hroðgar, lord of Scyldings, gave reply:
“For fights, dear Beowulf, you sought us out—
For favors came to me. Your father killed
A man; with sword in hand he caused a feud:
With Wilfingas he murdered Heaϸolaf.
He feared the Weders’ vengeance, wrath of kin,
And fled from home, afraid to stay with them.
He, seeking refuge, sought the South-Dane folk,
The honored Scyldings, over rolling waves,
When first I ruled the Danish folk in youth—
A king with power over men and wealth,
a rich fortress of warriors. At that time Heorogar was dead, my elder brother was no longer alive, Healfdene’s son. He was better
than I am. Afterwards, I settled the feud with money. I sent old treasures to the Wylfings over the water’s crest. He swore oaths to me. It
grieves me in my heart to tell any man what humiliations, what sudden afflictions Grendel has caused in Heorot because of his hate­ful
thoughts. My hall-troop, my band of warriors is lessened. Fate has
swept them off into Grendel’s terrible power. God may easily hinder
the deeds of the wild ravager. Very often warriors vowed over the
ale-cup, having drunk beer,
that they wished to await in the beer-hall
Grendel’s attack with the terror of swords.
Then this mead-hall, in the early morning
the princely hall was gore-stained; when daylight shined
all the benches were damp with blood,
a sword-bloody hall. I had fewer faithful ones,
dear warriors, when death took them away.
Sit now at the feast and loosen your thoughts,
your glory gained by swords, as your mind incites you.”
Then for the Geat men all together
a bench was cleared in the beer-hall.
There the strong-minded went to sit,
bold in their strength. A thane observed his duty,
he who bore in his hands an ornamented ale-cup,
gave out clear sweet drink. A scop sang at times
clear-voiced in Heorot. There was joy of heroes,
a host of Danes and Geats, not few in number.
Unferth spoke, the son of Ecglaf,
who sat at the feet of the lord of the Scyldings―
he unbound the war-secret―for him was the journey of Beowulf’s,
that brave seafarer, a great offence,
because he would not allow that any other man
on middle-earth ever obtain more
glories under heaven than himself.
“Are you the Beowulf that fought with Breca
on the broad sea, in a swimming contest?
Where you, for pride, tempted the waters
and for vain-glory in the deep sea
risked your lives? Not any man—
loved or loathed—could dissuade the two of you from that
sorrowful undertaking, when you two rowed out swimming.
There you both enfolded the flowing tide in your arms,
measured out the sea-path, wove with your hands,
glided over the needling water. The ocean surged with waves
in the welling of winter. You two in the water’s power
labored seven nights. He bested you in swimming,
had greater prowess. Then in the morning
the tide carried him up to the land of the Heatho-Ræmas;
from there, cherished by his people, he
sought his dear homeland, the land of the Brondings,
the fair stronghold, where he had folk,
fortress, and rings. The son of Beanstan,
truly stood by his vow against you.
So, I expect poor results from you,
although at every opportunity you have been strong in the storms of war,
In grim warfare, if you dare await
Nearby for Grendel for a night’s length.”
Beowulf spoke, Ecgtheow’s son:
“You hear me out, Unferth, my friend,
You are beer drunk, speaking about Breca
And talking tall about his journey. The truth,
I claim, is that my seastrength was greater,
and nobody else endured more wave hardships.
We said that and boasted, boyish as we were—
Both such youthful braggarts in those days—
Said we would swim the sea and we did.
Nakedsworded, we entered the saltwaves,
In hand our weapons: whalesbane;
We intended to fend off the fearsome fish.
We swam and not one span from me
Could he float, far on flood-waves,
Swift on sea, nor would I go from him.
So, at one on the sea were we,
For five nights, til the flood drove us apart,
Welling waters, coldest of weathers,
Night drawing nigh, and the north wind,
Hurling harshly against us. High were the waves!
The fury of the ocean-fish was roused:
There my mail-shirt maintained me,
Hard-locked against foes; helped me,
My braided battle-plate lying on my breast,
Gilded with gold. It bore me down to depths,
The foul foe-fiend, held me fast,
Grim its grip. Yet was it given to me
To reach that wretch with my razor-edged
battle-blade. The war-rush consumed
the mighty sea-beast through my hand.”
“So the hateful creatures continually
pressed me sorely. I served them
with my good sword, as they deserved.
They had no joy at that feast,
wicked destroyers, those that devoured me
sat at a feast near the sea-floor
but in the morning, wounded by blades
they lay dead by the wave-swept shore
by swords put to death, that never afterwards
round the deep-ford, the sea-faring
were hindered in their course. Easterly, light came,
bright beacon of God, the sea’s surface stilled,
so that I saw the wind-swept sea-walls
of the headlands. Luck often saves
the unweaved warrior, if his courage keeps.
And I myself slew nine sea-serpents
with my sword. Not one night
under God’s sky have I heard of a fiercer fight,
nor on the waves, of a more beleaguered warrior.
But I escaped their coils, intact,
but world-worn. The sea bore me away,
current-bound, to the Finnish lands,
on surging waves. And never have I heard a thing
about any brawls, or battles, or broken blades
of yours.
Breca never yet
at battle-play, nor either of you two,
accomplished so bold a deed
with bright swords. I do not boast of this,
though you became a killer to your brothers,
your close kinsmen. Because of that you shall suffer
torment in hell, though your mind may be good.
I tell you truly, son of Ecglaf,
that Grendel never would have committed so many horrors,
that terrible fierce assailant, to your lord,
humiliations in Heorot, if your heart,
your spirit, were as battle-grim as you yourself consider.
But he has found that he does not need greatly to fear the hostility,
the terrible sword-strength, of your people,
of the Victory-Scyldings.
He takes an enforced toll, is merciful to none
of the people of the Danes, but he takes delight,
kills and dispatches, does not expect strife
from the Spear-Danes. But soon now I shall
show him the strength and courage of the Geats,
summoning him to battle. Afterwards, any who will
may go to mead bravely when morning light
from the South shines bright over the children of men
on the following day, the sun clothed in radiance.”
Then he was joyful the giver of treasure
grey-haired and famous in war; the Bright-Danes’ leader
believed in this help; listening to Beowulf
the people’s shepherd heard steadfast resolution.
There was heroes’ laughter, the sweet din resounded,
and words were winsome. Wealtheow went forth,
Hrothgar’s queen mindful of custom,
gold-adorned, greeting the men in the hall,
and that noble wife gave a cup
first to the Lord of the East Danes,
bade him bliss at the beer-drinking,
beloved of the folk. He eagerly enjoyed
feast and mead-cup, victorious lord.
Then she walked around, the woman of the Helmings,
to the old and the young warriors, each at his bench,
holding the cup, the ring-adorned queen coming finally
to Beowulf.
Worthy of mind the mead-bearer
greeted the dear Geat, thanking God
with wise words for the fact that
she’d got her wish, that such an earl
had emerged to offer relief from horrors.
He took the full cup from Wealtheow
and spoke then, battle-eager
Beowulf, son of Ecgtheow, spoke:
“I had it in mind when I mounted the swell,
sat in the sea-boat with soldiers in order,
that—no matter what—the will I’d do
of all you people, else perish in slaughter
in the fiend’s tight grasp. I’ll follow through
with a hero’s valor, else here in the mead-hall
the end of me I’ll meet for sure.”
These words the woman well did impress,
this boast from the Geat. Gold-adorned she went,
lady of the people, by her lord to sit.
Then again, as erstwhile, inside the hall
noble speech reigned—the rabble lighthearted—
the tumult of winners, until in the end
the son of Healfdene sought to retire
