the battle-weary Grendel lying
lifeless, as he was injured
in the battle at Heorot. The corpse sprang wide open
when he suffered a blow after death,
a hard sword stroke, and then he cut off his head.
Shortly after, the wise men perceived that.
With Hrothgar, they looked on the water
that was a turmoil of waves, all mixed up,
a surf stained with blood. The salt-and-pepper-haired
old men spoke together about the great man:
that they had no hope thereafter for this prince—
that he, victory-triumphant, might seek to come again
to the most famous chief. Many agreed to this,
that the female sea-wolf had destroyed him.
Then came the ninth hour of the day. They abandoned the headland,
the sharp Scyldings. He departed towards home from that place,
The gold-friend of men. The guests in that land looked longingly around
Sick in spirit, and stared at the mere,
wished, and did not believe that they would
see their lord-friend himself. Then that sword,
after battle-sweat, into battle-icicles,
the war-blade began to wane. That was a thing of wonder,
that it all melted away, most like ice,
when the Father releases the binding of frost,
unwinds the deep water’s fetters, who holds dominion
over seasons and time. That is the true Creator.
He did not take to those dwellings, the man of the Wether-Geats,
more treasures, though he saw many there,
except for the head and the hilt together,
gleaming with treasure. The sword already melted,
the inlaid pattern burned up. That blood was so hot,
the poisonous departing-spirit who died in that place.
Soon, he was swimming, who had earlier endured that fight,
the fall in battle of enemies. He thrust up through the water.
The churning waves were entirely cleansed—
a huge expanse—since that fierce monster
had given up her days of life and all these fleeting works.
Then the defender of the sea-warriors reached land,
swimming vigorously. He revelled in the heavy load
of lake-treasures which he had with him.
Then they went towards him, gave thanks to God,
a mighty band of warriors, they rejoiced in their prince
because they could see he was safe.
Then helm and mail were quickly loosened
from that powerful man. The lake grew calm –
the cloud-covered water – stained with corpse-blood.
From there they went onwards along footpaths,
happy in their hearts, they traced the track,
the familiar way. Kingly-brave men,
from the sea-cliff they bore the head
arduously for each of them
very daring— four then had to,
upon that spear, carry in strain
to the hall, the head of Grendel—
till suddenly came to the hall
fourteen brave battle-hardened men
advancing Geats with their war lord,
proud in his troop, walked the mead-hall plains.
Then came marching the famed thanes’ lord,
a man bold in deeds, known for glory,
the brave hero, to greet Hrothgar.
By the hair was borne to the floor
Grendel’s head where men were drinking
unimaginable in front of the earls, and the woman there among them, a spectacular sight. The warriors looked on.
Beowulf proclaimed, Ecgtheow’s son:
“Listen, Healfdene’s son, we this sea-offering
have brought to you, prince of the Scyldings, with pleasure,
as a token of glory that you here may gaze on.
I with difficulty escaped with my life,
a war under water, a work ventured
with hardship. Very nearly was
The battle finished, except God protected me.
Nor could I at the battle with Hrunting
accomplish anything, even though that weapon was fit.
But to me the God of men granted
that I saw along the way a bright, powerful sword
hanging.
He so often guides
those without protecting friends; so that I drew the weapon,
then struck in that skirmish, when the occasion allowed me,
the keepers of the house. Then that battle-blade,
pattern-welded, burned up when the blood spurted,
hottest of hostile-sweats. From there I ferried that hilt
away from enemies, their wicked deeds avenged,
the violent deaths of Danes, just as it was deserved.
I bestow it to you, then, so that in Heorot you may
sleep without sorrows with your company of warriors,
and each of the thanes of your people,
old and young; you need not fear for them,
Prince of Scyldings, on that front—
mortal harm for your nobles—as you did before.”
Then the golden-hilt was handed over
to the wise old warrior, grey-haired battle-chief,
work of wonder-smiths; and when that one gave up this world
grim hearted man, adversary of god,
guilty of murder—and his mother too—
it came into the keeping of the best
of the world-kings between the seas
of those who deal treasures in Scandinavia.
Hrothgar spoke, scanned the hilt,
the old leaving on which was written the origin
of the ancient struggles, when the flood,
the rushing sea, eliminated the race of giants.
That went badly. That race was alien
to the eternal lord; their final retribution
came through the whelm of water the ruler sent.
Thus it was upon the guard-plates of bright gold,
through runic letters duly marked,
set down and stated for whom that sword
was first wrought, the choicest of blades,
twisted hilt and dragon-patterned. Then the wise one spoke,
Son of Healfdene. All fell silent.
“Well, now, he who furthers truth and right
among the people, an aged ward of the realm
who remembers all the distant past,
may say that this warrior was born the better man.
Glory is spread throughout the wide ways, O Beowulf, my friend—
yours over every nation. All this you patiently hold,
strength with wisdom of heart.
I shall fulfil my friendship toward you,
just as we two spoke earlier. You shall become as a refuge,
long-lasting, to your people,
and be a help to those heroes. Heremod? Not so much
to the Honor-Scyldings, those sons of Ecgwala.
Neither did he drive the Danes to their desires,
but their deaths and destruction.
Enraged, he razed the friends at his table
and brothers at his shoulder, so that he, that infamous king,
turned alone from the joys of men.
Nevertheless, the mighty God raised him up over all men,
exalted him in the joys of power and strength.
Yet, in his innermost spirit, he grew
bloodthirsty in his beating heart.
And never, not at all, not once did he give rings
to the Danes chasing fame. Joyless, he survived
until he suffered the pain of his strife—
the eternal torment of man. Now, learn from this,
understand virtue. This tale is for you,
crafted out of my wintered wisdom. It is wonderful to tell
how God almighty, to mankind,
measures out wisdom, domain, and dominion
through His own sovereign Spirit. He has power over all.
Sometimes, He sets free
the mind of a famed man (from a famous people)
to find his own delight, the earth’s joy.
He gives him a home and a city of men to hold;
He sets under his supervision a share of the world,
a kingdom of such expanse that, for all his unknowing,
he may not imagine for himself its borders.
The man lives in luxury. None may distract him—
neither sickness, nor old age, not even evil thoughts
cloud his mind. Not ever does malice
or war-mongering materialize, but all the world
bends to his will. He knows nothing worse.
Eventually, the allotment of pride within him
waxes and grows. Then the protector sleeps,
the soul’s shepherd. This sleep is too deep,
bound with anxieties; the Slayer is very close—
who sinfully shoots the bow.
Then he struck in the heart, under the helmet,
with a bitter arrow, he doesn’t know how to protect himself—
the perverse commands of evil spirits.
What he has too long possessed seems too little;
angry and covetous, he does not honorably give
golden rings, and his future destiny
he forgets and neglects, that which previously God granted to him,
the Lord of wonders: his allotment of honor.
It happens afterwards, in the end,
that his borrowed body perishes,
falls fated for death. Another takes over
who deals out the treasures, the earl’s ancient property,
without grieving. He does not heed fear.
Guard yourself against wickedness, dear Beowulf,
most excellent man, and chose better,
eternal counsels for yourself. Pay no mind to pride,
famous warrior. Now is your power’s glory—
for a while. Immediately afterwards
illness or the blade will strip away your strength,
or fire’s grasp, or sea’s surge,
or sword’s bite, or spear’s flight,
or terrible old age. Or your eyes’ brightness
will fail and dim. Soon enough it will come about
that death overwhelms you, warrior.
Consequently, I for half of a hundred years, have had the power
over the Ring-Danes beneath the heavens, and by battle have held
away clans throughout this world, by ash-spears and weapons, so
that I considered on no enemy under the sky of heaven. Indeed,
accordingly to my home there came a return of fortune, grieving after
joy, when Grendel, old enemy, became my intruder. I perpetually
felt the suffering of that calamity. Gratitude to God for that, to the
eternal lord, that in my abode I can look with my own eyes on this
sword-dreary head after ancient strife. Now at this time go to your
seat-place, ease yourself into the feast, battle distinguished, many
treasures between us shall be shared after morning.”
The Geat was glad of it and immediately went
to seek out a seat, as the wise man commanded.
As before, speeches were uttered again
in an elegant manner for the powerful man
and again for those sitting in the hall.
The shadow of night drew in, dark over the warriors.
The noble troop all arose, for the aged, grey-haired Scylding
wished to seek out his bed. The Geat, too,
the brave shield-bearer, felt an unmeasurable
desire for rest, and so a hall-thegn immediately
guided out the one who had come from afar
and who was weary from his journey.
Out of respect he attended to
the thegn’s every need, whatever in those days
such sea-faring warriors should have.
Then the great-hearted man rested.
Lofty and shining with gold, the hall towered up;
inside the guest slept until the cheery black raven
announced the joy of the sky:
the time when brightness came gliding.
The warriors were in haste;
nobles were eager to sail home again,
back to their people, and the bold-hearted visitor, too,
wished to visit his ship and travel far from there.
Then the hardy one commanded
that Hrunting be presented to the son of Ecglaf.
He commanded Unferth to take back his precious iron sword,
and he gave him thanks for the loan.
He said that he considered it
a good and powerful friend in battle—
and no, he did not reproach the edge of the sword.
That was high-minded of the man!
And when the warriors were there, eager to go,
with their armor equipped,
that nobleman stepped forth, honored among the Danes,
towards the high seat where the other one was.
Brave by battle in hell, he addressed Hrothgar.
Beowulf spoke, son of Ecgtheow:
“Now we seafarers, having come from far away,
wish to tell you that we desire to
seek Hygelac. Here we have been
happily entertained with delights. You treated us well.
If I can do any thing else on earth
to earn more of your mind’s love,
than the battle-deeds I have done already,
ruler of men, then I will be ready at once.
If ever I hear from across the ocean
that neighboring people threaten you with terror,
as your enemies formerly did,
I will bring you a thousand thanes,
heroes as help. I believe in Hygelac,
the lord of the Geats, though he may be young,
shepherd of his people, that he will support me
with words and deeds, that I might honor you well
and deliver a forest of spears to help you,
the support of my strength, if you are in need of men.
Then if Hrethric himself determines, king’s son,
to come to the Geat’s houses, he will find many
friends there. Distant lands are
better sought by one who is himself good.”
Hrothgar spoke and answered him:
“The wise Lord has sent those words
into your heart. I have never heard
a man hold forth more wisely at such a young age.
You are strong in might and sage in mind,
wise in what you say. I give my opinion:
if it should happen that a spear seizes—
a bloody fierce battle— Hrethel’s heir,
sickness or sword takes your lord,
the people’s keeper, and you have your life,
the Sea-Geats would not have a
better king, treasure-guardian of warriors, for the choosing, if you should wish to rule
the realm of your relatives. Your spirit pleases me
more and more, beloved Beowulf.
By your actions, between the people there will be—
between the Geats and the Spear-Danes—
shared friendship, and strife will sleep,
hostilities that they carried out before;
and as long as I hold the broad kingdom, we will share wealth—
people will greet each other with goods over the gannet’s bath.
Ships will bring gifts and love tokens over the waves. I know our
people remain staunch both in friendship and in enmity, blameless
in every respect according to the old ways.”
Then and there the protector of warriors, the kinsman of Healf­
dane, gave him twelve gifts. With those gifts in the hall he told him to
have a safe journey to his own people, and come back again soon.
Then the king, lord of the Scyldings, good to noblemen, kissed the
best thane and took him by the neck. Tears fell on him
from the grey-haired one. He anticipated two things,
the old and very wise one, the second thing more strongly,
that they would not be allowed to see each other afterwards,
the proud ones in a meeting. The man was so dear to him
that he could not restrain his breast-welling.
But in his heart, fixed with heart-strings,
he longed secretly after the dear man,
with blood he burned. From there, Beowulf,
the warrior proud with gold, walked onto the grassy ground,
exulting with treasure. The ship waited
for its owner; it rode at anchor.
Then, in its going, the gift of Hrothgar
was often praised. That was a singular king,
otherwise blameless, until old age took from him
the joys of strength; it often harms many.
Then came to the sea the brave-hearted
young warriors, bearing chainmail,
linked war-shirts. The land-warden saw
the return of the nobles, as he did before.
He did not with insult from the cliffs
greet the guests, but he rode toward them,
said his welcome to the Weder people,
those bright-armored warriors, went to the ship.
Then on the sand, the sea-worthy boat
was laden with war-clothes, the ring-prowed ship
with horses and treasure. The mast towered
