the heathen hoard, his hand seized a treasure
of shimmering stones.
He later learned
he’d been swindled while asleep,
conned by a thief’s guile. For that, the people—common folk
and landed lords—would live his wrath.
He was not at all of his own accord of the craft of the treasure held by the serpent,
of his own self’s will he who sorely injured him
because of painful constraint a thief, I know not which
sons of men fled hostile blows,
in need of a place and there in entered
a man racked by guilt immediately it befell him there.
Then against the stranger terror stood
however . . . upon the wicked one . . . obtained peril.
He sought a gold vessel there were so many
in that earth-hall, ancient treasures
as they in days of yore, an unknown man
a great legacy of a noble kind,
thoughtful, had hid there
precious treasures all of them consumed by death
in earlier times; and then were again one
of the multitude of that people, he who moved the longest
the watchman, mourning for friends, he went to delay that
so that he for a little while, the long obtained treasure
would be able to enjoy. A hill all-ready
remained in the ground near the water’s waves,
new by the headland fixed by the art of imprisonment;
there inside bore of the treasure of earls
a hoard of rings, a hand-wrought part
of ornamented gold; he spoke a few words:
“Earth. You now hold what now men cannot,
what warriors had.
That’s not all: earlier, the good ones took this from you.
But a hostile death, a life-hack of evils
overtook every one of my people—
each of them gave it all up, the hall-joys they had seen.
He has nothing, who would wear a sword,
or offer up the rich cup, that dear drink.
Go look for glory somewhere else.
The hard helmet, decked out in gold,
must lose its shimmer. The scrubbers sleep—
those who should shine the battle-masks.
And the full-metal-jacket that endured combat,
over the breaking of shields and the bite of iron,
this falls apart without the man.
The ring-mail will not get far
without the war-lord, without the hero inside.
There was now no harp’s joy, no glad-beamed mouth,
no fine hawk swinging through the hall, no swift horse
Beat hooves in the borough. Brutal death has
Sent forth too many of mankind.”
Thus, sad in mind, he spoke of sorrow,
Alone after all, unhappy he roamed
Day and night until death’s wave
Overwhelmed his heart. The worm found hoard-joy,
Ancient scather of dawn, a barrow standing open
For one who, seething, seeks out treasure.
The naked dragon flies by night, wicked,
Encircled by flames. All who dwelt on earth
Beheld him with dread. He must hunt out
Evil in the ground, where he guards heathen gold,
Old, wise in his winters, the people’s harm
Held as his store-house a hoard in the ground,
exceedingly powerful, until a certain one made him
swell with anger in his heart. To his lord he bore
a goldplated cup, begged for a pact of peace
from his lord. Then the hoard was ransacked,
the hoard of rings was diminished. Favour was granted
to the wretched man. The lord gazed
at the ancient work of men for the first time.
Then the dragon awoke, strife was renewed.
He moved swiftly along the stone, hard-hearted he discovered
the footprint of the enemy. He had stepped forward
with stealthy skill near to the head of the dragon.
Thus an unfated man may easily survive
misery and exile, who the Ruler’s
favour retains. The guardian of the hoard searched
eagerly along the ground, he wished to find the man,
the one who sorely troubled him as he slept.
Hot and wrathful-minded, often he encircled the barrow
and all around outside. Although he found no man
in that wilderness, still he prepared for war,
for battle-work. Sometimes he returned to the barrow,
sought the treasure-cup. But he soon found again
that some man had discovered the gold,
the best of treasures. The Hoard-guardian waited
miserably, until evening came.
Then the barrow-watcher swelled,
would repay with fire the theft
of the precious cup. Then was the day passed
to the delight of the worm. No longer must he lie behind the wall,
did he have to wait, but he went forth with bale-fire,
infused with flame.
It was a terrible beginning
to the people in the land, as it soon became
to their treasure-giver a sore end.
Then the visitant began to spew flames,
to burn bright buildings. The gleam of fire stood
in hostility to humankind. The hated sky-flier
wished to leave nothing alive.
The warfare of the worm was widely seen,
violence of the intensely hostile one, near and far,
how the destroyer hated and harmed
the people of the Geats. To his hoard he afterwards hurried,
the hidden splendid hall, before daytime.
He had surrounded the people of the land with flame,
fire and burning. He trusted his barrow,
warfare and wall. The expectation deceived him.
Then the terror was made known to Beowulf
quickly in truth, that his own home,
best of buildings, melted with burning flames,
the gift-seat of the Geats. For the good one that was
misery in his heart, the greatest of mind-sorrows.
The wise man believed that he had bitterly angered
the Ruler, eternal Lord,
contrary to the old law. His chest welled within
with dark thoughts, as was not typical for him.
The fire-dragon had destroyed the fortification of the peoples,
the stronghold, land by the sea
from without with fire. The war-king,
prince of the Weders, plotted vengeance for that.
The protector of fighters then commanded them to fashion,
lord of heroes, a wholly-iron,
wondrous war-shield. He knew well
that no forest-wood might help him at all,
no linden shield, against flame. The long-ago-proven prince
must await the end of departing days
of worldly life, and the worm as well,
though he long held the hoard-wealth.
The ring-holding prince rejected the thought
that he might attack the wide-flier
with a great army. Not at all did he dread the battle,
nor did he dread the worm’s war-making in any way,
his strength and valor, because he long ago had often
dared close encounters with hostile enemies,
and battle-clashes, since he, a man blessed with victory,
had cleansed the hall of Hrothgar,
and at war grappled with the race of Grendel,
hated folk. Nor was that the least
of the hand-to-hand struggles, where one slew Hygelac:
when the king of the Geats, in the assaults of battle,
the people’s beloved lord, in Friesland,
the son of Hrethel, died by a thirsty sword,
struck with the blade. Beowulf came away from there
by his own might: he performed a swimming feat.
He had on his arm thirty pieces
of battle-gear in all, when he went to the sea.
The Hetware had no cause to boast
of that fighting on foot, those who carried shields
against him; few came back
from that battle-hero to find their home.
Then the son of Ecgtheow swam across the sea’s expanse,
the miserable, solitary one, back again to his people.
There, Hygd offered him treasure and rule,
rings and royal seat. Her son she trusted not,
that against the alien army, the ancestral seats
he could hold fast. Thus was Hygelac dead.
Still the bereft could not prevail
upon the prince in any way,
that he would become lord over Heardred,
or that kingship he would choose.
Yet he kept himself among people with friendly counsel,
gladly with honor until he became older,
he held sway over the Weather-Geats. The exiles
sought him over the sea, the sons of Ohtere.
They had rebelled against the lord of the Scylfings:
the best of the sea-kings,
of those in Sweden who dispensed treasure,
the renowned ruler. For him that became the limit of life.
There he obtained a useless life-wound
by strokes of the sword, son of Hygelac.
And the child of Ongenðeow again departed
to seek out his home after Heardred lay dead.
He left Beowulf to hold the throne,
to rule the Geats. That was a good king.
He remembered recompense for the fall of the prince.
In later days, Eadgils became
a friend in poverty. With people, he assisted
the son of Ohtere widely over the sea,
with warriors and weapons. Then he took vengeance afterwards
with cold sorrowful courses, deprived the king of life.
So he had survived each of the enmities,
of the cruel conflicts, the son of Ecgðeow,
works of valor, until one day,
when he had to go forth against the serpent.
He set off then, one of twelve, swollen with rage,
the lord of the Geats, to look for the dragon.
Then he found out where the feud had arisen,
the baleful malice of men. The infamous treasure-cup
came into his keeping, through the hand of an informer.
He was the thirteenth man in that throng,
he who brought about the beginning of that battle,
the sad-minded servant. The wretched one had to lead the way
from there to the field. He went against his will
to where he had knowledge of a certain earth-hall,
a barrow under the ground near the surging sea,
the warring waves. Inside it was full
of jewels and wire ornaments. The fierce guardian,
the ready warrior held the golden treasures,
old under earth. That was no easy bargain,
to be undertaken by any man.
Then the violent-hard king sat on the ness,
while he offered luck to his hearth-companions,
gold-friend of the Geats. A mournful mind was his,
restless and ruin-eager. Wyrd immeasurably near
that which should greet the aged man,
to seek his soul-hoard, split asunder
life from body. Not long after that was
the life of the æþeling enclosed in flesh.
Beowulf spoke, the son of Ecgtheow:
“In youth I survived many war-rushes,
many battle-hours. I remember all of that.
I was seven-winters when the prince of treasures
lord-friend of the people, took me from my father.
King Hreðel kept and held me, gave me treasure and hospitality,
mindful of kinship. I, a man in his residence, was not ever at all more
loathly to him than any one of his sons, Herebeald and Hæðcyn
or my Hygelac. A deathbed was unfittingly spread for the eldest
by the deeds of his kinsman, when Hæðcyn injured him, his lordfriend, with an arrow from a horn-bow, missed the mark and shot
his kinsman, one brother shot the other with a bloody missile.
That was an unatonable fight, wickedly done, with a weary heart.
Nevertheless the prince had to lose his life unavenged. Thus it is sad
for an old man
To endure that his son rides
Young upon the gallows. So he makes a lament,
A song of sorrow, while his boy swings
To the pleasure of a raven. And he can’t help him:
Too old and enfeebled to do anything.
Always will he be reminded each morning
Of this child’s passing. Nor can he consider another
Awaiting him within some refuge or redoubt—
Another protector of his good works—when this one
Compelled through death is finished with his deeds.
With weary heart, he views his son’s rooms—
gathering place abandoned, sleeping quarters too airy—
Riven of joy. Knights in unending sleep,
Heroes lain in darkness. There is no play of the harp,
No play in the courts as once there was.
Then he retreated to his bed and sang songs of sorrow, one after
another; everything seemed too spacious to him, the premises and
the dwelling. “In this way the protector of the Weders dragged on his
life, grieving, with heartfelt sorrow for Herebeald; there was no way
at all to settle with the slayer a compensation for the crime; yet he
could not persecute the battle-warrior for his abject deeds, though
he was not happy about it. Then he, to whom the pain had occurred,
with that sorrow gave up the pleasures of men, went for God’s light;
he bequeathed to his heirs, as each fortunate man does, land and
towns, when he departed from this life.
Then hostility and strife were brought about across the wide
water between the Swedes and the Geats, fierce violence, after
Hrethel had died, until Ongentheow’s heirs became bold warriors,
impetuous frontline fighters, who refused to honour peace across
the water, but often inflicted horrible, pernicious wounds on the
flanks of the Rysenbjerg. My dear kinsmen took revenge for it, with a
violent tit for tat—the news spread; still, one of them had to pay for
it with his life, a tough bargain. The battle proved fatal to Hæthcyn,
lord of the Geats. Then, the next morning, I heard that one brother
avenged the other on the killer with the edge of the sword, when
Ongentheow encountered Eofer. The battle-helmet was shattered,
the old Scylfing collapsed, deathly pale. His hand remembered
plenty of hostile acts, it did not hold in the deadly blow.
At war, with a flashing sword, I repaid him those precious things that he had given me as was my lot.
He gave me land, a place, a home.
Nor was there any need for him, that he ought to seek among the Gifthas or among the Spear-Danes or among the Swedes a worse warrior, or to buy one with gold.
I have always gone before him in the ranks,
alone at the front,
and so I always must
wage war
while this sword lasts, that has often availed me—long before and ever after—
since I barehanded killed Dæghræfn, champion of the Hugas
in front of everyone.
No, he could not bring back that gear, that neck-ring, to the Frisian king,
but he fell among the warriors a guardian of the standard a noble one in his bravery
nor was a blade his death
but I crushed his ribcage broke the surging of his heart.
Now shall the bright blade’s edge
hand and hard sword, fight for the hoard.”
Beowulf made a speech, spoke boastful words
one final time: “I survived many
a bold battle in my youth; yet I will,
as an old guardian of old folk seek a feud,
and garner glory, if the evil one will
leave its earth-hall and attack me in the open.”
He then addressed each of his men,
Those bold-helmed warriors one last time,
trusted companions:
“I would not bear a sword,
a weapon to the dragon, if I knew how
it could be otherwise
to grapple honourably, as I did before with Grendel.
But there I expect hot deadly fire,
fierce and venomous. I would not flee
by the space of a foot from the keeper of the cave.
It will turn out at the wall
as fate, the Lord of every man,
dictates for us. At heart, I’ve courage enough
to forgo arms against this flying fighter.
Men in armour, protected by chainmail,
wait on the cliff for whichever of the two of us
survives the wound
after the deadly battle.
This is not your venture,
nor is it in the power of any man, save me alone.”
He knew he was to spend his strength on the adversary,
perform bravery. “With valor must I
get the gold, or else the battle,
the fierce fatal attack, will take away your lord.”
Then he stood up by his shield, the renowned warrior,
