hardy beneath the helmet, he wore a battle-shirt
under the stone cliffs, he had faith in the might
of a single man. The path of the spineless is not such!
Then by the wall, he who, great in goodness,
had survived scores of battles, the crashes of clashes when troops contend,
saw the stone arches standing, a stream bursting forth
thence from the barrow. There was a gush of water
hot from harmful fires; no one could survive
deep inside, near the hoard, for any length of time
without burning because of the dragon’s flame. Out from his breast then, swollen with anger,
The Weather-Geats’ leader let loose a cry,
Roared, stark-hearted; his voice rang in
Beneath grey stone, a clear call to battle.
Hate was aroused when the hoard-guard knew
The voice was a man’s. No time remained
To sue for peace. First there shot forth
The fierce one’s breath out from the stone,
Steaming hot, hostile, shaking the ground.
At base of barrow the warrior swung his shield,
Lord of the Geats, to face the ghastly foe
When the ring-coiling one was roused in its heart
To seek out strife. Had drawn his sword
The good warrior-king, an ancient heirloom,
Its edges undulled.
To either was
intending destruction a terror from the other.
He stood resolute with towering shield
friend of lords, when the wyrm coils
together at once; he in war-gear waited.
It departed then burning bending to gliding
hastening towards fate. Shield well protected
life and limb for less time
the glorious king than his desire
there he for the first time for the first day
had to possess that fate did not grant to him
glory in battle. Hand raised up
lord of Geats, struck the multicolored terror
with the relic of the Danes, that the edge gave away
bright on the bone, it bit less strongly
than its lord had need,
subdued by its labors. Then, after the war-blow, the barrow’s warden felt a rage inside,
Spat deadly fire; the flames of war erupted.
The Geat’s gold-lord did not boast of victorious triumphs:
His naked war-blade failed when he needed it,
Although it shouldn’t have, the legendary iron.
Nor was that an agreeable trip, when the glorious son of Ecgtheow
Felt compelled to surrender ground;
Against his will, he had to make a home elsewhere,
As do all when they let go their loaned days.
Nor was it long before those two monsters met once more.
Again, the hoard-warden braced himself, his breast boiled with spirit;
The other, enveloped by fire, was in a tight spot—
He who used to lead his people.
Nor did his companions, sons of princes, throng to him
With warriors’ virtue, but they turned to the woods,
Protected their lives. In one of them
The heart swelled with sorrow; nothing can ever
Turn a thoughtful man away from his family.
He was called Wiglaf, son of Weohstan,
Beloved shield-bearer, man of the Scylfings,
Kinsman of Ælfhere. He saw his king,
In his battle-helmet, suffer from the heat.
Then he remembered the honors which were given to him before,
The rich estate of the Wæmundings, all his father’s privileges;
Then he could not hold back. He took his shield in hand,
The yellow wood, drew the old sword—
It was known to everyone as the legacy of Eanmund, Ohthere’s son.
A friendless pariah, he was killed in battle by Weohstan,
Who delivered to his kinsman a shining helmet,
Ringed mail, and an old, monstrous sword—
Onela gave that back to him as a gift, his nephew’s war-gear,
Immaculate soldier’s trappings, but he did not mention
His crime, though he killed his brother’s child.
Weohstan held that treasure for many years,
The sword and chainmail, until his own child could
Perform manly feats like his father had done.
Then, among the Geats, he gave Wiglaf the war-gear—
An inestimable amount—when he left this life,
wise in course. That was the first journey
for the young champion, that he should face
the rush of battle with his lord-friend.
His mind’s spirit did not melt, nor did the legacy of his kinsman
weaken in war. The wyrm found that out,
after they had come together.
Wiglaf made a speech, spoke many right words
about their companion. His spirit was mournful.
“I remember that time, where we took mead,
when we promised to our lord
in the beer-hall, to him who gave us these rings,
that we would repay him for the battle-gear,
if just such a need should befall him,
helms and hard swords. For this he chose us in the host,
for this journey, of his own will.
He deemed us worthy of renown, and gave me these treasures—
for he judged us spear-warriors good, brave helmet-bearers,
—even though he planned, our lord, to carry out this glorious deed
alone: the guardian of his people! For he alone among all men
has achieved most glory—he acted without a second thought!
And now the day has come that he, our liege-lord, has need of strength
from sturdy warriors. Let us go, then, to help our battle-chief,
for as long as this beast, the savage fire-fear, remains! For my own part,
God knows, I would much rather that with my gold-giver my body should
embrace the flames! Nor does it seem fitting to me that we should
bear our round shields back home, unless beforehand we might
destroy the enemy, defend the life
of the lord of the Weders.
I know well
b
That he, for all his past deeds shouldn’t have to go this alone
Out of all the Geats suffer this affliction
And fall in battle; for us, sword and helmet
Mail coat and war armor must be shared for both of us.”
He waded through the slaughter smoke, bore his war-helmet
To help his prince. He spoke a few words:
“Beowulf my Beowulf, hold on and well
As you in your days of youth said,
That that you would never allow your renown to decline
As long as you should live. Brave in deeds you must
Protect your life, resolute prince,
With all your might. I will help you.”
After these words, the angry wyrm came,
The terrible malicious fiend, made another move
Hostile, adorned with billows of flame, it sought its enemies
Those hateful men. He came with waves of flame and
Consumed every bit of the shield. His mailcoat wasn’t able
To offer protection to the young spearman,
But the young man went courageously
Under his kinsman’s shield when his own was
Destroyed by flames. Then the war-king once again
Thought on his glorious deeds, struck out with his
Battle sword with all his might until it struck its head
Compelled by hate. Nægling shattered,
Beowulf’s sword failed in battle,
Old and grey. To him it was fated
That blades of iron could never
Help him in battle. His hand was too strong
The man who asked too much of every sword, as I have heard.
When he took into battle
a weapon hardened by wounds, he was not the better for it.
Then for a third time the ravager of a people—
the terrible fire-breathing dragon, enmity in its mind,
rushed to the heroic one when a chance was offered to it,
burning and battle-fierce. It closed its sharp teeth
through the hero’s throat. Beowulf was reddened
with his life-blood; a sanguinolent stream surged out.
I have heard told that in the hour of need of the king of a people
a warrior at his side made known his boldness,
the skill and the courage that nature bestowed upon him.
He did not heed the head, and thus his hand was burnt
as the brave man came to the help of his kinsman
and smote the hostile creature a little lower down,
the warrior in armour, so that his sword,
woven in gold patterns, sank in. Afterwards,
the fire started to fade. The king himself then
mastered his senses again, drew his dagger,
deadly and battle-sharp, that he carried in his corslet;
the Lord of the Windloving people drove it to the serpent’s heart.
The enemy fell—his life vanquished by their valour—
together side by side they had destroyed it,
two princes of one house. Such should a man behave
when his thane is in need! This was the prince’s
last moment of glory for his own deeds,
the last of his labours in this world. The wound,
which the earth-dragon had earlier inflicted on him,
started to sear and swell. Beowulf then understood
that in his breast welled up the deadly evil,
poison from within. Then the hero went,
until by the wall wise in thought
he sat on a seat. Looked at the giants’ works
how the stone arch pillar fixed
enduring earth-house would be held within.
To him then with hands bloodstained
famous leader the good warrior without measure
his friendly lord refreshed with water,
battle wearied, and his helm unfastened.
Beowulf spoke. He spoke about the wound,
Deadly wound. Knew he well
That he in the space of a day had experienced
Earth’s joys. Then all was gone
In a number of days, death exceedingly near:
“Now to my son I would wish to give
War-garments, if fate had granted to me thus
Any heir afterward
To my body belonging. I ruled the people
For fifty winters. There was no folk-king
Of any neighboring peoples
Who me for a war-friend dared to attack,
With terror oppressed. I on earth remained
By destiny, held my own well,
Did not seek treacherous quarrel, nor did I swear many
Oaths wrongfully. I can of this all,
With mortal wound weakened, have joy,
Because the Leader of men did not need to lay at my charge
Slaughter of kinsmen, when departs my
life from body. Now you quickly go
look at the treasure under the hoary stone,
dear Wiglaf. Now the serpent lies, sleeps sorely wounded, plun- dered of its treasure. Be swift now, so that I can see the riches of ages
past, the store of gold, can look clearly on the bright crafted gems; so
that I can more easily after a wealth of treasure leave behind my life
and the people that I long ruled.”
Then, I have heard, the son of Wihstan in accordance with the spoken
words immediately obeyed the wounded lord, the one stricken in
battle, and wearing a ring-net, a shirt woven for battle, went under
the barrow’s roof. Then, as he passed the seat, the brave young
thane, triumphant in victory, saw a multitude of precious jewels,
gold glittering on the ground, wondrous things on the wall, and the
lair of that serpent, the old flyer before daybreak; and ewers, vessels
of long-ago men standing without one to burnish them, deprived
of their decoration. There was many a helm, old and rusting, many
arm-rings twisted with skill. Treasure, gold in the ground, can easily
overpower any one of mankind, let him hide it who will. He saw, too,
a standard all of gold hanging high over the hoard, the greatest of
wonders made by hand, woven with dexterity. From it a light shone
out so that he could see the floor’s expanse and look over the wrack.
Of the serpent there was no sign at all; a sword edge had carried it
off. Then I have heard that the hoard was plundered in the barrow,
ancient work of giants, by a single man,
hefting to his chest goblets and dishes according to his own judg- ment; he seized as well the banner, the brightest of testaments. By
now the sword—for its edge was iron—had already scathed the
guardian of the old lord’s treasure, who for a long time inflicted
terrible fire, scorch-seething hot upon that hoard by many a mid­
night, until he died by violence. The eager messenger was in haste
to return, impelled by the treasures; concern was breaking him as to
whether he might find the bold-hearted Beowulf alive in that open
place where the prince of Geats was, where he had left him earlier
with failing strength. Then Wiglaf, with those treasures, found his
blood-soaked lord, the renowned prince,
at the end of life. He afterwards began
to wet him with water until the point of a word
broke out of his breast-hoard.
Gloomy, the old man regarded the gold:
“For these riches I give thanks to the Ruler
to the World-King I say these words
to the Eternal Lord for that which I look on
which for my people I was permitted
to deliver before the day of my death.
For this treasure hoard now I trade
the sacrifice of my old life. Attend still
to the people’s needs. I cannot be long now.
Let those renowned in battle make a barrow
bright once I am burnt on the bluff beside the sea.
As a reminder to my people it must
rise high, up on the whale’s headland,
so that seafarers—those who propel their ships
from far away, across the darkness of the seas—
come to call it Beowulf’s Cliff.”
The brave-minded king took from his neck
a golden torc; he gave to his servant,
the young spear-warrior, a gold-adorned helmet,
an arm-ring, and his mail-coat. He commanded him to use it well:
“You are the last of our kin,
the descendants of Wægmund. Events have swept away
all my kinsmen, warriors in their bravery,
to their ordained end. I must follow them.”
That was the last utterance of the heart-thoughts
of that old man, before he chose the funeral pyre,
hot battle-flames. From his breast departed
his soul, seeking the judgment of the righteous.
Then it had befallen the young man
sorely, that he saw on the ground
his dearest friend at life’s end,
wretchedly bearing. Likewise lay the destroyer,
eldritch earth-dragon reft of life,
balefully beaten. The coiled wyrm no longer
could wield the ring-hoard,
for iron-edges had ruined him,
hard war-scarred leavings of hammers,
so that the sky-flier, stilled by wounds,
fell to the stone near the hoarding.
Never after will he wheel and sail the air
at midnight, glorying in the treasure-trove,
revealing his bulk, but he fell to earth
from the war-leader’s handiwork.
Indeed few mighty men on earth—though I have heard that they
were daring in their deeds—might have gained from that fight,
should they have rushed into the poisonous foe’s breath, or, finding
that guardian dwelling in his barrow, stirred his ring-hoard with
their hands. Death paid for Beowulf’s share of the treasure: the end
of their loaned lives came for each of them then, and it was not long
until those late to battle abandoned their ticket, weak oath-breakers
who before had, ten at once, not dared fight with spears in their
lord’s great need.
But yet they were ashamed to bear shields,
war-garments, where the aged one lay.
They looked upon Wiglaf. He sat wearied,
the foot-soldier near his lord’s shoulder.
He wished to rouse him with water—for him that did not at all succeed.
Nor might he on earth, though he longed for it very much,
hold onto the life in that chieftain,
nor change anything of the Ruler’s.
The judgment of God would control deeds
for each of men, as he now yet does.
Then was from that young one an angry answer
easily begotten, for him who previously his bravery forsook.
Wiglaf declaimed, the son of Weohstan,
a man sad in soul. He looked at the unfaithful ones:
“That, alas, may say he who would speak the truth,
that this lord, who gave treasures to you all,
cavalry-ornaments, which you stand in there,
when often he gave on the ale-bench
to people sitting in the hall, helmet and corslet,
the chief to his thanes, the mightiest of such
either far or near that he could find,
which battle-garments he plainly
bitterly cast away, when battle seized him.
The king of the people not at all
needed to boast; still, God allowed him,
Wielder of victories, so that he himself advanced,
